{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': ' Bolsonaro remains silent after election defeat to Lula as key allies accept result', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-31T12:51:24Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/31/brazil-election-bolsonaro-concede-reaction', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Brazil', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jair Bolsonaro', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/jair-bolsonaro'}, {'tagTitle': 'Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Tom Phillips', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomphillips'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '635f333f8f08d67823c48e5e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'South Korean authorities have opened an investigation into the deaths of more than 150 people, in a crush in a nightlife district in Seoul on Saturday as experts said crowd controls could have reduced the surge that led to the disaster. It remained unclear what led the huge Halloween party crowd to head into a narrow alley in the Itaewon area. Witnesses said people fell on each other “like dominoes”, and some victims were bleeding from their noses and mouths while being given CPR. The South Korean prime minister, Han Duck-soo, has promised a thorough investigation and authorities said they were focused on reconstructing the chain of events leading up to the surge and were looking at whether anyone may have been responsible for triggering the crush. On Monday afternoon, dozens of crime scene investigators and forensics officers descended on to the rubbish-strewn alleys. which were eerily quiet with many shops and cafes closed. Earlier in the day, people laid white chrysanthemums, drinks and candles at a small makeshift altar off an exit of the Itaewon subway station, a few steps away from the site of the crush. Another memorial for the victims was set up at Seoul cityhall plaza, with others set up across the country. Calls for accountability have grown in the press and online after witnesses reported seeing a relatively small number of police on the streets in relation to the size of the crowds. As many as 100,000 people – mostly in their teens and 20s, many wearing Halloween costumes – had poured into Itaewon’s small, winding streets to reach the bars and clubs. Itaewon is part of Yongsan, one of the Korean capital’s 25 districts. On 28 October, the district announced its plans for managing the Halloween celebrations in Itaewon, a gathering that attracts huge crowds but has no official organiser. The authority laid out measures including anti-Covid precautions, safety checks for bars and restaurants, rubbish management and anti-drug policies, but nothing on how to control the revellers who were expected to converge on the area. Police said at a briefing on Monday they had deployed 137 officers to the event, pointing out that number was significantly higher than previous years. But local reports said most police deployed were focused on drug use and traffic control, rather than crowd control. “This was a disaster that could have been controlled or prevented,” Lee Young-ju, a professor from the department of fire and disaster at the University of Seoul, told broadcaster YTN. “But this was not taken care of, with no one taking the responsibility in the first place.” An editorial published in the Korea JoongAng Daily on Monday pointed to the lack of a central organiser as a contributing factor, but argued that “the disaster could have been avoided if the police and fire authorities had thoroughly prepared for possible scenarios in advance”. Kong Ha-song, a disaster prevention professor at South Korea’s Woosuk University, said that for all practical purposes “no one was looking after pedestrian safety” on the night. He told the Associated Press that more police and government workers should have been called on to monitor potential bottleneck points and said the lack of a central organiser may have contributed to the tragedy. Paek Seung-joo, a professor of fire and disaster protection at Open Cyber University of Korea, made a similar point, telling Reuters: “As there was no central authority, each government arm just did what they usually do – the fire department prepared for fires and the police prepared for crime..” Hong Ki-hyeon, a senior official with the national police agency, acknowledged the problem during a news conference on Monday, saying police did not have an established way to deal with such gatherings. Lee Sang-min, the minister of the interior and safety, asked for patience. “It’s not appropriate to make hasty conclusions before the exact cause is determined – whether it was caused by a lack of police or whether there is something that we should fundamentally change for rallies and gatherings,” he said at a briefing.\nMost shops and cafes nearby were closed on Monday, and police cordoned off the site of the incident, which was strewn with rubbish. Schools, kindergartens and companies around the country scrapped planned Halloween events. K-pop concerts and government briefings were also cancelled. Seo Soo-bin, a university student in her 20s who came to the site to pay her respects on Monday, said all her friends knew someone who had died. Fighting back tears, she added: “People talk about responsibility but it’s not like Halloween in Itaewon is some organised event or anything, it’s just a gathering where everyone goes … I don’t know. It breaks my heart.” Online, claims also spread that police were not actively managing the crowd, which allowed too many people to congregate around the subway station and in the alleyway at the centre of the disaster. “I’ve lived in Itaewon for 10 years and experienced Halloween every year but yesterday was by no means particularly crowded compared to previous years,” one Twitter user wrote. “Ultimately, I think the cause of the disaster was crowd control.” Steve Blesi, an American whose son Steven died in Itaewon, voiced anger at authorities for allowing the crowds to get so big. “I see politicians out there grieving on Twitter,” he said. “It’s just, to me, publicity on their end. Whereas they should be working to try to ensure rules are in place to not allow this type of crowding to ever happen again.” Witnesses said many people appeared not to realise the disaster that was unfolding steps away from them. Some clad in Halloween costumes continued to sing and dance nearby as others lay lifeless on the ground. Ken Fallas, a Costa Rican architect who went to Itaewon with expat friends, used his smartphone to film video showing unconscious people being carried out from the alley as others shouted for help. He said the loud music made things more chaotic. “When we just started to move forward, there was no way to go back,” Fallas said. “We didn’t hear anything because the music was really loud. Now, I think that was one of the main things that made this so complicated.” More than 25 of the dead were foreigners from the US, China, Australia, Russia, Iran and elsewhere.\nThe bodies of the dead were being kept at 42 hospitals in Seoul and nearby Gyeonggi province, according to Seoul City, which said it would instruct crematories to carry out more cremations each day as part of plans to support funeral proceedings. The crowd surge was South Korea’s deadliest disaster since 2014, when 304 people, mostly high school students, died in a ferry sinking. The sinking exposed lax safety rules and regulatory failures. It was partially blamed on excessive and poorly fastened cargo and a crew poorly trained for emergency situations. Saturday’s deaths will probably draw public scrutiny of what government officials have done to improve public safety standards since the ferry disaster. With Associated Press and Agence France-Presse', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T15:57:59Z'}, {'id': '635fcd548f085b32867e4eae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There have been at least 10,000 fewer abortions since the nationwide abortion rights established by Roe v Wade were repealed by the US supreme court in June. New research from the national research project #WeCount shows that with federal abortion protections rolled back, there have been 10,570 fewer legal abortions – a 6% decline – than estimates in April before the June ruling.\n#WeCount is a national abortion reporting project with the Society of Family Planning, an abortion and contraception science group. The research project has been tracking changes in abortion access since the overturning of Roe v Wade, collecting data from medical offices, hospitals, telemedicine providers and clinics. The data does not include self-managed abortions, which could lower the overall decrease in terminations, according to the New York Times. The recent statistics are a net calculation, meaning the total loss accounts for a decreased number of abortions in some states as well as an increase in abortions in other areas, for people who traveled out of state to terminate their pregnancies. In the states that saw declines in their abortion numbers, including 13 states that have banned most abortions, terminated pregnancies decreased by about 22,000. Meanwhile, other states that have protected abortion saw about 12,000 more abortions performed. The published data shows that there has not been a total absorption of patients from other states who can no longer access abortion services, meaning there were thousands of people who “felt they had no options”, Ushma Upadhyay – #WeCount co-chairperson and a public health social scientist as well as professor at the University of California, San Francisco – said to FiveThirtyEight. The data suggest that people in restrictive states traveled far to access an abortion, a burden that is exacerbated for people with fewer financial resources. “Some of these states where abortion was banned – Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, for example – are some of the poorest states in our country, and people would have to cross multiple state lines to get to another state where abortion remains legal,” said Kari White, a University of Texas at Austin researcher who is on the #WeCount research steering committee, to the New York Times. States have also been exploring possible ways to target criminalizing interstate travel for an abortion, creating an additional barrier for those who are living in restrictive states. “Even for the people who make it to another state, this is a hardship,” White added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T15:35:51Z'}, {'id': '635efb438f082fdc8beb165f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has launched a wave of cruise missiles at hydroelectric dams and other critical infrastructure across Ukraine on Monday morning, with explosions reported near the capital Kyiv and in at least 10 other cities and regions. Ukraine’s air command said it shot down 44 out of 50 enemy rockets. Video footage suggested that several missiles were intercepted in the skies around Kyiv, soon after 8am local time. Air raid sirens went off nationally, with citizens told to seek shelter. The governor of Kyiv, Oleksiy Kuleba, said “massive shelling in the region” had damaged electricity and energy infrastructure. He said residents should expert emergency power cuts. He added: “There is currently one victim. We are clarifying the information.” The cruise missiles were fired from Russian Tu-90 and T-60 aircraft flying north of the Caspian Sea and the Rostov region. They hit targets in Kyiv, Zaporizhzhia and Kharkiv oblasts, as well as in the areas of Mikolaiv, Lviv, Zhytomyr, Kirovohrad and Chernivtsi. In a statement on Facebook, Herman Halushchenko, Ukraine’s energy minister described Monday morning’s attacks as “barbaric” and said: “Electric substations, hydropower and heat generation facilities were hit by rockets. Kyiv’s mayor, Vitaliy Klitschko, said 40 percent of the Ukrainian capital’s residents do not have water and 270,000 apartments are without power as of Monday evening. Fragments from a Russian rocket, shot down by Ukrainian air defence, landed in Naslavcea, Moldova, damaging some houses and buildings, according to Moldova’s interior ministry. Russia’s defence ministry has announced that the partial mobilisation, which had been used to send reinforcements into Ukraine as part of what Russia terms its “special military operation”, has ended. In a statement on behalf of defence minister Sergei Shoigu, the ministry said: “All activities related to conscription for military service by the military commissariats, together with the executive authorities of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation, of citizens in the reserve have been stopped.” Twelve grain export ships have left from Ukraine today, despite Russia pulling out of the Turkey-UN brokered grain deal, according to Ukraine’s minister of infrastructure Oleksandr Kubrakov. Russia called ship movements through the Black Sea security corridor “unacceptable”. “Under the current conditions, there can be no question of guaranteeing the security of any object in the area until the Ukrainian side accepts additional obligations not to use this route for military purposes,” Russia’s defence ministry said in a statement on Monday. The UN disputed Moscow’s claim that a civilian cargo ship carrying Ukrainian grain may have been involved in a drone strike against Russia. UN aid chief Martin Griffiths said on Monday that no such ships were in the Black Sea’s designated security corridor at the time Russia said the attack had taken place. Turkey will continue its efforts to support the Black Sea grain export deal despite Russian hesitancy, president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said on Monday after Russia suspended its participation in the initiative at the weekend. France is working towards allowing Ukraine to export food supplies via land routes rather than by the Black Sea through Poland or Romania, the French farming minister Marc Fesneau said on Monday. Norway’s military will be put on a higher level of alert to sharpen its response to the war in Ukraine, its prime minister Jonas Gahr Støre has announced. Russia has dismissed reports that its agents hacked Liz Truss’s phone, and managed to gain access to sensitive information. When asked about the report, the Kremlin said there was little in British media that could be taken seriously. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy claimed his forces repelled a “fierce offensive” by Russian troops in the eastern Donetsk region. “Today they stopped the fierce offensive actions of the enemy,” Zelenskiy said in his Sunday night address. “The Russian attack was repelled.” The fiercest fighting in Donetsk region has been around the towns of Bakhmut and Avdiivka. Russia’s Black Sea flagship vessel, the Admiral Makarov, was damaged and possibly disabled during an audacious Ukrainian drone attack over the weekend on the Crimean port of Sevastopol, according to an examination of video footage. Open-source investigators said the frigate was one of three Russian ships to have been hit on Saturday. A swarm of drones struck Russia’s navy at 4.20am. Aides to Zelenskiy hinted the country was behind the well-orchestrated raid, though his government has not claimed responsibility. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, said he was “deeply concerned” by Russia’s suspension of the grain export deal and delayed his departure to attend the Arab League summit in Algiers for a day to try to revive it. Russia requested a meeting on Monday of the UN’s security council to discuss the issue. Guterres was engaged in “intense contacts” to get the agreement back and spoke to the EU’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell. Kyiv’s infrastructure ministry said on Sunday that 218 vessels were now “effectively blocked” in its ports – 22 loaded and stuck at ports, 95 loaded and departed from ports, and 101 awaiting inspections. Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, expressed “hope” that Joe Biden will recall the 1962 Cuban missile crisis when dealing with the war in Ukraine. In an interview for a Russian state television documentary on Sunday, Lavrov said there were “similarities” between the ongoing war in Ukraine and the 1962 confrontation. “I hope that in today’s situation, President Joe Biden will have more opportunities to understand who gives orders and how,” Lavrov said. “The difference is that in the distant 1962, Khrushchev and Kennedy found the strength to show responsibility and wisdom, and now we do not see such readiness on the part of Washington and its satellites,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T20:05:10Z'}, {'id': '6358b8018f080759184ff75d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For about as long as I’ve been alive, there have been no sihek on the island of Guam.\nThe sihek, or the Guam kingfisher, is a beautiful blue-gold songbird that’s been extirpated in the wild since the 1980s. Like most of Guam’s native birds – 10 out of 12 native species – the sihek rapidly declined after the introduction of the invasive brown tree snake brought to the island after the second world war as a stowaway on military ships. It is hard to articulate the trauma that is the absence of birdsong. It’s even harder to describe the feeling that accompanied the recent announcement by the US Fish and Wildlife Service of its proposal to release some of the roughly 140 sihek now being bred in captivity in zoos across the country, not on Guam, but on Palmyra Atoll instead. Palmyra Atoll is a set of remote islands roughly 1,000 miles (1.609km) south of Hawaii, and over 3,500 miles east of Guam. Palmyra has no permanent human population and is administered by the service alongside other third parties, including the Nature Conservancy. The theory is that because there are no brown tree snakes on Palmyra, the birds will have a fighting chance. On one hand, the people of Guam are elated that the sihek may soon fly free. On the other, we’re grief-stricken because Palmyra is not the bird’s home. Its home is Guam. Its home is here with us. While the federal government’s laudable hope is that the successful release of the sihek in Palmyra will pave the way for their eventual repatriation in Guam, we have our doubts. First, the government has made precious little progress in eradicating the brown tree snake population in Guam. Incredibly, what counts as the most successful suppression protocol to date is dropping dead mice (which have been laced with acetaminophen) from the sky. Second, the US notoriously underestimates climate change as a determining factor in this equation.\nAlthough more empirical studies linking climate change and invasive species at the landscape level are needed, it is clear that climate change facilitates the spread of invasive species and creates new opportunities for them to become more invasive. Certain extreme weather events such as tropical cyclones, which are predicted to intensify in coming years, will only exacerbate the matter. Guam is incredibly vulnerable. Our coral reefs are under severe stress, as the ocean grows warmer and more acidic. In fact, bleaching caused by rising sea surface temperatures has killed a third of our reefs. Our freshwater supplies are likewise at risk, not only from drought and increased demand but also from saltwater intrusion due to sea level rise – which is happening faster in this part of the world than in others.\nThe island is on path to becoming even hotter, with the number of hot days (over 32C) expected to increase to 257 days out of the year. Conversely, the number of cool nights (below 23C) is expected to decrease (from an average of 40 a year in 1950) to an average of zero a year. If climate change is the god of death, it is a merciless one and it is coming for everything, even the cool respite of night. Then again, in Guam, the god of death is being outdone by the god of war. As I write this, the US military – in the name of national security and as part of its broader strategy of containing China’s rising influence in the region – is dramatically expanding its footprint on the island. As part of that expansion, it is constructing a firing range complex on the northern end of the island, which involves the destruction of hundreds of acres of limestone forest. The razing of these forests will endanger not only the sihek but other species as well, including the Marianas crow, the Marianas fruit bat and the Marianas eight-spot butterfly. And that’s only on land. At sea, the military is moving forward with plans to engage in nine types of advanced warfare activities over an area of 501,873 square nautical miles (1.7m square kilometres) – a surface size equivalent to California, Oregon, Washington, New York and New Jersey combined. These activities – which will include the use of explosives and active sonar – pose a serious threat to sea turtles and several species of dolphins and whales.\nThe navy has secured permission to “take” – that is, to injure or otherwise disturb a marine mammal in the wild – 29,000 whales and 37,000 dolphins each year. To take but one example, the navy has been authorized to “take” up to 150 humpback whale mother-calf pairs a year: that is, 75 mothers and 75 calves. This is despite there being a well-known nursery in the waters off of Saipan, an island just north of Guam, where humpback whale calves are reared during this sensitive stage of life. So you see, it is not only birdsong being lost but now whale song too. When I was asked to write a reflection on what I’m most worried about losing in the face of climate change, I hesitated. Sometimes, it’s hard to face the truth. The truth is we’ve lost so much already. The truth is we’re buckling beneath the pressure of three threats at once: climate change, invasive species and military expansion. The truth is that the three have formed an unholy trinity that now threatens to smash our small but ancient civilization and thereby rob the world of the gift of our difference. Of course we’re not taking any of this lying down. Like other Indigenous communities around the world, we’re resisting. We’re telling the truth. We’re fighting for a different future. A future where birds fly free. A future where whale calves have no trouble hearing their moms. A future full of song. Julian Aguon is the author of No Country for Eight-Spot Butterflies and a finalist for the 2022 Pulitzer prize for commentary', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T09:15:56Z'}, {'id': 'e39d90ba-d31c-44a8-963a-b776f8be2112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Norway is putting its military on a raised level of alert, moving more personnel on to operational duties and enhancing the role of a rapid mobilisation force in response to the war in Ukraine – although the prime minister said there was no reason to believe Russia intended to invade. “This is the most severe security situation in several decades,” Jonas Gahr Støre told a news conference on Monday. “There are no indications that Russia is expanding its warfare to other countries, but the increased tensions make us more exposed to threats, intelligence operations and influence campaigns.”\nGahr Støre said there was “no reason to believe that Russia will want to invade Norway or any other country directly”. “We must be more vigilant,” he added. “I don’t believe ordinary people will notice any change.” Norway would also seek to bring its new fleet of US-made P-8 Poseidon submarine-hunting maritime patrol aircraft into regular operation at a faster pace than originally planned, the chief of defence, Gen Eirik Kristoffersen, said. The armed forces would spend less time training and more time on operational duties, and the home guard, a rapid mobilisation force, would play a more active role, the defence minister, Bjørn Arild Gram, said. The air force had called off training in the US with its F-35 fighter jets, preferring to keep them in Norway, said Kristoffersen. “We expect this situation to last for at least one year,” he said. Gahr Støre stressed that nothing had happened in recent hours to cause the increase of preparedness, which was “due to developments over time”. Norway has a 198km (123-mile) border with Russia in the Arctic. Last week, Norwegian authorities detained a man who they said posed as a Brazilian scholar but was allegedly a Russian intelligence officer suspected of spying. Norway’s PST domestic intelligence service said his name was Mikhail Mikushin. The suspect was detained in Tromsø, where he worked at the Arctic University of Norway. Several Russian citizens have been detained in Norway in recent weeks, chiefly for being in possession of drones or allegedly photographing subjects covered by a photography ban. Most have since been released. European nations have heightened security measures around key energy, internet and power infrastructure after underwater explosions ruptured two natural gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea built to deliver Russian gas to Germany. The damaged Nord Stream pipelines off Sweden and Denmark discharged huge amounts of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, into the air. The Russian embassy in Oslo has alleged that authorities there have used drone and ship sightings, as well as incidents involving Russians with cameras, to fuel a “spy mania”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T15:12:57Z'}, {'id': '635fc8888f0868a35e228753', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Politicians from Italy’s leftwing Democratic party have said they will raise questions in parliament after more than 2,000 Benito Mussolini supporters converged on the fascist dictator’s home town over the weekend, as Giorgia Meloni’s government was criticised for instead focusing on shutting down an illegal rave. Fascist sympathisers from across Italy performed the stiff-armed salute while expressing support for Meloni – whose party, Brothers of Italy, has neofascist roots – as they gathered in Predappio, the Emilia Romagna town where Mussolini was born and is buried, to mark the 100th anniversary of his march on Rome, the event that initiated Italy’s fascist era. Events in the town organised by Mussolini’s descendants and the neofascist group Arditi d’Italia got under way on Friday, the anniversary of when Mussolini and his armed forces began their march from Milan to Rome before seizing power two days later, and ended on Sunday with a march to the Mussolini family crypt in the San Cassiano cemetery. But Italy’s new interior minister, Matteo Piantedosi, was focused on a different gathering in the same region – an unauthorised rave in an abandoned warehouse on the outskirts of Modena. On Sunday he ordered the eviction of more than 3,000 people from the Witchtrek 2K22 Halloween event, a three-day party that had been due to end on Tuesday.\nAndrea Orlando, a Democratic party politician and former justice minister, suggested the government should have been more focused on the fascist “rave” in Predappio, which he said was “in my opinion … far more disturbing”. He asked: “Was it compliant with current regulations?” Displays of fascist sympathy are banned under Italian law, which also forbids the reconstitution of fascist parties. Sandra Zampa, a Democratic party senator, said she would raise the Predappio issue in parliament. “They paraded calmly and happily,” she said. “Have prime minister Giorgia Meloni and interior minister Matteo Piantedosi nothing to say about this? Is there no repentance for the violation of legislation that prohibits the reconstitution of the fascist party and apology for the regime?” Getting tough on raves was a flagship campaign policy of Meloni’s Brothers of Italy and its far-right coalition partner the League, which is led by Matteo Salvini, now the deputy prime minister. Both leaders regularly accused the last interior minister, Luciana Lamorgese, of taking a soft approach over raves, including a six-day event in August last year that Meloni said was filled with “drugs and alcohol”.\nIn her maiden speech to parliament as prime minister last week, she said Italy was “not a country for young people” and described a “growing emergency of deviance, made up of drugs, alcohol and crime” that her government planned to tackle by getting young people involved in cultural and sporting activities. Salvini, who was interior minister in 2018-19, criticised his leftwing opponents for their defence of illegal raves and their concerns over what he called “the return of legality”. “Are we joking aside?” Salvini wrote on Twitter, praising Piantedosi’s tough line against the parties and “the thugs who dominate”. Meloni, who in the past has praised Mussolini, told parliament last week that she never had sympathies for any type of regime, while denouncing Mussolini’s anti-Jewish laws as Italy’s “lowest point”. In the lead-up to the general election in late September, Meloni presented Brothers of Italy as a conservative, moderate rightwing force but refused calls to remove the neofascist tricoloured-flame symbol from the party’s logo. The symbol also features on Mussolini’s tomb. Mirco Santarelli, the president of the Ravenna unit of Arditi d’Italia, who organised the march in Predappio on Sunday, told La Stampa: “If Meloni got rid of the flame symbol, we wouldn’t vote for her any more. She has already taken a distance from nazi-fascism, because she understood that she was obliged to do so. It would be like a judge asking me if I’m a fascist, I would respond no as otherwise I’d get into trouble.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T15:13:49Z'}, {'id': '635fb4ad8f0868a35e22864f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Visitors to Shanghai’s Disney resort were trapped inside for the second time in 12 months after authorities and operators announced a sudden lockdown as part of China’s strict pandemic response. In a repeat of scenes from across Covid-zero China, viral videos on Monday appeared to show guests rushing to the locked gates of the theme park in an attempt to escape the lockdown. It followed extraordinary scenes on the weekend, with a mass escape of employees from a locked-down Foxconn factory in Zhengzhou, to walk up to hundreds of kilometres to their hometowns. The Disney resort, which includes Disneyland and shopping districts, announced shortly after 11.30am that it was immediately closing the theme park and surrounding areas in compliance with Covid regulations. On WeChat the Shanghai government said all people were barred from entering or exiting the park, with those still inside needing to be tested and show a negative result before being allowed to leave. Anyone who had visited the park since 27 October would need to test for the virus three times in three days, it said. Videos shared across social media showed people not long afterwards crowding around the park gates. One clip showed an employee telling trapped guests that shops and amusements were still running inside the park, and he would inform them if there were any updates, as a colleague locked the gate behind him. The park was also closed for two days last November with more than 30,000 visitors stuck inside, after authorities ordered all of them to be tested. China’s commitment to containing and controlling every outbreak has led to hugely disruptive lockdowns of sites ranging from individual buildings to entire counties. Across cities and provinces movement has been curtailed, with hundreds of millions under lockdown and estimates of hundreds of thousands of people sent into regional quarantine centre for being infectious, a close contact, or a relatively distant neighbour. Shanghai reported just 10 local cases on Saturday. China reported 479 confirmed cases and more than 2,200 asymptomatic cases nationally on Monday. The two high-profile lockdowns were the latest signs of growing discontent among some Chinese people with the increasingly disruptive restrictions imposed suddenly in places across the country, sometimes due to just a handful of cases. Social media posts over recent months have depicted scores of shoppers and office workers fleeing buildings, sometimes overwhelming security to get away before they are locked in. The Apple-supplier Foxconn has not disclosed the number of infected workers, nor the number who have left, but said on Sunday that it would not stop them from departing after hundreds of employees on Saturday appeared to begin fleeing the world’s largest iPhone factory, some scaling the fences to escape. The Taiwan-headquartered manufacturer has about 200,000 people at its Zhengzhou complex, which includes dormitory accommodation for workers. The mass departures came amid reports of fear over the outbreak and complaints of poor living conditions and inadequate Covid responses, two weeks into a “closed-loop” system of operating began. Local officials on Monday rejected claims that conditions had become unliveable, and that the company had arranged transport for those who wanted to go home. The official also said the situation was now under control and production was continuing, but an insider told Reuters there were fears the factory’s production of iPhones could drop by 30% next month. The exodus has prompted nearby cities to draw up plans for isolating the migrant workers returning to their home towns. In a show of support, residents along nearby travel routes left bottled water and provisions next to roads with signs such as: “for Foxconn workers returning home”, according to social media posts. “Some people were walking amid wheat fields with their luggage, blankets and quilts,” wrote a user of WeChat in a post about the social media images. “I couldn’t help but feel sad.” Many residents had hoped that the zero-Covid policy might be eased after last week’s Communist party congress, the most important meeting of China’s five-year political cycle. But instead the country’s leader, Xi Jinping, reiterated his commitment to the pandemic response for the indefinite future. The policy has been damaging to China’s economy and social fabric, but health experts and Chinese officials have said that allowing the virus to spread among the 1.4 billion residents would be disastrous, with potentially hundreds of millions of deaths. There is little prior infection in China, large numbers of elderly people remain unvaccinated and the health system is geographically inequitable and would be unable to cope, they said. Additional research by Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T14:45:16Z'}, {'id': '635f9a4a8f08e9a4a96d7716', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Iranian protest anthem that has become the soundtrack to the national uprising was again thrust into the international spotlight over the weekend when Coldplay performed a cover and broadcast it live around the world. The British band played the song, Baraye, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on Friday and Saturday night at the start of their world tour, with the exiled Iranian actor Golshifteh Farahani on stage and singing in Farsi. Friday’s concert was streamed via satellite to cinemas in 81 countries, although not in Iran, where playing or singing the song could lead to arrest. Baraye, which means “For …” or “Because of …”, was written by one of Iran’s most popular musicians, Shervin Hajipour, with verses taken from 31 messages that citizens had posted online sharing their individual misery, pain and grief. Hajipour sings lyrics including “for dancing in the streets”, “for every time we were afraid to kiss our lovers” and “for women, life and freedom” – a chant used frequently at protests. Days after the song was released and went viral, the 25-year-old was arrested and his song deleted from Instagram. He has since been released on bail but has gone silent. However, his music had been widely shared, with other videos showing Baraye being sung by Iranian schoolgirls, blaring from car windows in Tehran and playing at solidarity protests around the world. It has received tens of thousands of submissions for a Grammy award that honours music dedicated to social change. Iran has been gripped by protests since the death in custody on 16 September of Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old of Kurdish origin who was arrested in Tehran by the “morality police” over her headscarf. Amini was allegedly beaten, taken to hospital in a coma and later died. Since then, protests led by women have been met with violence by authorities, with at least 270 people dead and 14,000 arrested, according to the group Human Rights Activists in Iran. Now in their seventh week, the rallies have become a full-blown student uprising against the regime that shows no sign of ending.\nAt Saturday’s concert, Coldplay’s lead singer Chris Martin told the audience that in Iran “young women and young people are fighting for their freedom, for the right to be themselves”. After inviting Farahani on stage, he told fans: “You may not know this song but we’ve got to give it everything because we’re going to send this with love from here to Iran.” During the performance, Hajipour’s original video of him singing the song was broadcast above the stage. Footage of the concert has been widely shared by Iranians on social media, although government restrictions on the internet make it difficult to verify accounts inside the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T13:29:49Z'}, {'id': '635f56828f082fdc8beb1868', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Taiwan’s national palace museum has admitted to previously undisclosed breakages of three artefacts from the Ming and Qing dynasties, worth a reported £66m ($77m). The items – a bowl, a teacup and a plate – were broken in three separate incidents during the past 18 months but the damage came to light only last week under questioning from a Taiwan legislator. The artefacts date back to the 15th and 17th centuries. The museum said it was unable to determine who was responsible for two of the breakages after checking 10 years of CCTV footage, but one was found to be caused by negligent handling, and disciplinary action was being taken.\nThe museum’s director, Wu Mi-cha, said a senior staff member had put the artefact on a one-metre-high desk, from where it fell to the floor and broke “like a bowl would”. On Friday, Taiwan’s opposition legislator, Chen I-shin, accused Wu of ordering staff not to speak of the breakages and to treat all paperwork as classified, claiming he had received a “tip”. The museum and Wu strongly denied accusations of a cover-up or gag orders on staff, saying their actions were to ensure the “evidence” was not tampered with while they investigated the breakages. “We have absolutely not hidden anything about this,” Wu said at a press conference.\nThe museum told the Guardian there was no formal notification to the public or culture ministry because the items were classified only as “general antiquities”, the lowest-level designation of cultural heritage. It also said the value estimate was “way lower” than the figure reported, but did not elaborate. The national palace museum on the outskirts of Taipei holds the world’s largest collection of Chinese artefacts, much of it brought over from the mainland by Chiang Kai-shek after the Nationalists fled to Taiwan during the Chinese civil war. The collection spans 5,000 years of Chinese history, with only a fraction of it displayed at any one time. Artefacts not on loan or being exhibited – including the three broken items – are uninsured. The museum vowed to improve storage practices for the artefacts, which had been moved several times across China in the early 20th century to keep them safe during the Sino-Japanese and then civil war. The news of the breakages has been seized upon by Taiwan opposition parties, and by nationalist social media users in China who accused Taiwan authorities of seeking to destroy Chinese culture. Hashtags relating to the incident were viewed more than 600,000 times by Monday, with some commenters linking it to the Chinese government’s claim that Taiwan is a Chinese province. One said: “I believe that only by completing reunification as soon as possible can we prevent our national treasures from being destroyed for no reason again!” Additional research by Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T13:37:09Z'}, {'id': '635fb60d8f0868a35e22865c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Brazil’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, has fallen silent after his chastening election defeat to his leftist rival Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. A stream of world leaders have stepped forward to recognize Lula’s stunning political comeback, including the US president, Joe Biden, the UK prime minister, Rishi Sunak, the Russian leader, Vladimir Putin, and China’s Communist party chief, Xi Jinping.\nBut Bolsonaro – a pro-dictatorship radical who has repeatedly hinted he might not accept defeat – has yet to concede. His last message on Twitter – an excerpt from the biblical book of Ephesians – was posted at two minutes before midnight on the eve of an election he went on to lose by a margin of more than 2m votes. With 100% of votes counted, Lula secured 50.9% to Bolsonaro’s 49.10%. Lula received 60.3m votes while the rightwing incumbent had 58.2m.\nThe defeat makes Bolsonaro the first serving president in Brazilian history to be voted out of office. Lula will take over on 1 January 2023. While Bolsonaro remained mute, key allies did accept the result in a sign that the populist’s power was rapidly ebbing away after four tumultuous years in office. Silas Malafaia, a prominent televangelist who was one of Bolsonaro’s most vocal cheerleaders, tweeted: “The sovereign will of the people has established itself.” Malafaia tweeted a quote from the British writer CS Lewis as his candidate’s defeat sank in: “It is not your business to succeed, but to do right. When you have done so the rest lies with God.” The newly elected pro-Bolsonaro governor of São Paulo, Tarcísio de Freitas, also recognized Lula’s win, telling journalists: “The election result is sovereign.” Another key ally, the lower house leader, Arthur Lira, said: “The will of the majority, expressed at the polls, should never be challenged.” Even Sergio Moro, the pro-Bolsonaro judge who controversially jailed Lula in the lead-up to the 2018 election before taking a job in Bolsonaro’s cabinet, recognized the leftist’s victory. “Thus is democracy,” Moro tweeted. Ricardo Salles, Bolsonaro’s former environment minister, tweeted: “The result of the most polarized election in Brazil’s history prompts many reflections and the need to seek ways to pacify a country that is literally split in half. Now is the time for serenity.” But Bolsonaro and his three politician sons remained tight-lipped on Monday morning. The news website UOL said he was “holed up” in the presidential residence in Brasília.\nBy Monday lunchtime the only hint that Bolsonaro might be prepared to accept defeat was a tweet from one of his closest allies, the evangelical preacher Damares Alves, in which she wrote: “We lost an election but we haven’t lost our love for our country ... Bolsonaro will leave the presidency in January with his head held high”. The first Bolsonaro to break the silence was the first lady, Michelle Bolsonaro, who posted a quote from Psalm 117 on Instagram. “O praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people. For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever,” it said. Later that afternoon Bolsonaro’s senator son, Flávio Bolsonaro, tweeted: “Thank you to each one of you who helped us rescue patriotism … We will hold our heads high and we will not give up on our Brazil.” Reginaldo Lopes, a Worker’s party congressman who ran Lula’s campaign in the key swing state of Minas Gerais, said Bolsonaro’s silence spoke volumes about his dislike of democracy. “It underlines how he has never had any affection for democracy. Any serious democratic candidate would immediately call the president-elect to congratulate them and recognize their defeat and their adversary’s victory.” Some observers have voiced concern that Bolsonaro may follow in the footsteps of his US ally Donald Trump and refuse to accept defeat in an attempt to keep his political movement alive. José Roberto de Toledo, a political columnist for the news website UOL, thought it mattered little whether Bolsonaro conceded defeat or not. “The senate has accepted [the result]. The lower house has accepted it. The electoral court has accepted it. All of the institutions have accepted it – and the military is quiet,” Toledo said, adding that he was rather enjoying a rare break from the president’s blathering. “Bolsonaro’s a poet when he shuts up,” Toledo said. Rather than plotting a coup or insurrection, Toledo joked that Bolsonaro was probably kicking a wall in the presidential palace, swearing at the first lady or practising yoga breathing techniques to remain calm. “I think he genuinely believed he would win. He believed his own lie. So he’s probably brooding, coming to grips with defeat.” The political commentator Bernardo Mello Franco tweeted: “One by one, Bolsonaristas recognize Lula’s victory. This leaves the president without the political support to attempt any kind of coup-style adventure.” Lopes also dismissed the risk of Bolsonaro attempting to defy the result, pointing to the widespread acceptance of Lula’s triumph from across the political spectrum and within the political establishment. “Brazil and its institutions all immediately recognized President Lula’s victory. This was crucial,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-31T19:28:47Z'}]}