{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': ' Fifty years on, ‘Nixon in China’ loses its sparkle in Beijing and Washington', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-21T01:55:14Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/21/fifty-years-on-nixon-in-china-loses-its-sparkle-in-beijing-and-washington', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Taiwan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Richard Nixon', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/richard-nixon'}, {'tagTitle': 'Mao Zedong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mao-zedong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vincent Ni', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/vincent-ni'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '621301108f086f7273b8a75b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said Covid-19 restrictions, including mandates and vaccine passes, will begin to lift once the country gets “well beyond” the Omicron outbreak’s peak. At a post-cabinet press conference on Monday, Ardern said case numbers were likely to peak in mid-to-late March, or three to six weeks away. Case numbers were expected to double every three to four days. “It’s likely then, that very soon, we will all know people who have Covid or we will potentially get it ourselves,” she said. Ardern said at an earlier stage of the pandemic, this prospect would have been “scary”, but now there are three main reasons why it is less so: the highly vaccinated population; Omicron being a mild to moderate illness due to high vaccination rates and boosters making hospitalisation 10 times less likely; and public health measures like masks, gathering limits and vaccine passes slowing down the spread to ensure everyone who needs a hospital bed can get it. “So far, that plan is working. We had 46 cases per 100,000 people compared to 367 in New South Wales, and 660 in Victoria, at the same point in the outbreak.”\nThe country recorded 2,365 new cases of the virus in the community on Monday, 116 people in hospital and two further deaths, bringing the total number of deaths since the start of the pandemic to 55. After the Omicron wave peaks, there will probably be a rapid decline, followed by cases stabilising at a lower level, Arden said. It is then that government can consider easing public health measures, beginning with loosening restrictions on gathering sizes, and later, moving on from using vaccine passes and mandates where vulnerable people are less likely to be affected. “If we hadn’t had vaccine passes, as we managed Delta, we would have had to instead use more general restrictions across the whole population. They have always been the least bad option. But while they have been necessary, as I’ve always said, they have also been temporary.” “They will remain important in some areas though, for some time,” she said. Arden said it is difficult to set an exact date for easing mandates, but indicated the government needs to be confident New Zealand is “well beyond the peak” and that the pressure on the health system is manageable. The announcement comes as hundreds of anti-mandate protesters enter their 14th day of occupying parliament’s grounds. The protest has also operated as a vehicle for anti-vaccine sentiment, QAnon-style conspiracy theories, antisemitic views, and calls for the execution of journalists, politicians and health officials. Ardern directed a message to the protesters: “Everyone is over Covid. No one wants to live with rules or restrictions. But had we not all been willing to work together to protect one another, then we all would have been worse off as individuals, including losing people we love. “That hasn’t happened here for the most part and that is a fact worth celebrating, rather than protesting.” Restrictions will ease when doing so would not compromise the lives of thousands of people, and not because the protesters demanded it, Ardern said. “Now is not the time to dismantle our hard work and preparation, to remove our armour just as the battle begins.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-21T04:47:48Z'}, {'id': '6212c17d8f086f7273b8a4c1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nineteen journalists from Papua New Guinea’s leading television media company, EMTV, have been suspended following a walk-off protest by staff. The staff walked off the job last week in support of their head of news and current affairs, Sincha Dimara, who was suspended earlier in February for “insubordination” which according to reports consisted of running stories about the arrest of Australian businessman Jamie Pang including criticism of police and criminal procedure in the case. The walk-off meant that last Thursday no news was produced by the station, which was forced to air a rerun of Wednesday’s 6pm news bulletin.\nThe staffing dramas centre around the coverage of Pang, who was arrested in 2021 after illegal firearms and an alleged meth lab were found in the Sanctuary Hotel Resort and Spa in Port Moresby, where Pang was group operations manager. Pang pleaded guilty to and was convicted of the firearms charges but was not charged with any drug offences, with police saying that outdated drug laws in the country left them unable to pursue further prosecution. Papua New Guinea has no laws prohibiting the production, sale or use of methamphetamine. Pang is currently held at the detention centre in Bomana. On 5 February, a memo from the interim CEO of EMTV, Lesieli Vete, was sent to the EMTV newsroom regarding Pang stories. “You are hereby directed to drop all stories from EMTV on air and online on Jamie Pang, and any other related stories concerning Jamie Pang’s gym and sporting events. “I will be working with you closely today until further notice to review EMTV’s news stories so as to ensure that we are broadcasting stories in the best interest of the public,” said the memo, which has been seen by the Guardian.\nDimara, who was head of news and current affairs at the time, told the Guardian she had been asked by Vete over email to explain why EMTV was reporting on Pang and his supporters. But Dimara said she stood by the decision to cover the story, particularly in light of recent parliamentary debates of drug laws. “Jamie Pang is an Australian citizen, a businessman and a sports personality. He was charged for been in possession of firearms and ammunition ... He is been detained at Bomana and we are aware that he will be deported. If or when it happens or not is still news.” Dimara said Pang was not awaiting trial – which can limit news coverage – and she saw no reason as to why stories related to him should not run. “We are not breaking any laws and I cannot see how we will be held in contempt.”\nVete later issued a statement saying the leaked memo “was taken out of context”. “At no time were EMTV’s journalists restricted nor stopped from reporting unfolding stories on the detained resident,” the statement read. It said the memo was intended to get journalists to “drop stories sympathising with Pang”. “EMTV journalists have been cautioned to be sensitive when conducting interviews and to follow reporting guidelines. The memo did not in any way restrict the journalists’ freedom of press, rather the memo was circulated to staff with the view to properly scrutinise the content of news stories before they were aired that day.” Two days after the memo regarding coverage of Pang was sent to EMTV, Dimara was suspended. A press statement released on social media by EMTV staff stated they were “dismayed at the extreme harsh treatment of our head of news” and what they alleged was “the continuous interferences from outside”. “The news team strongly believes that the stories that ran on the nightly news relating to Jamie Pang were unbiased and reported with facts and did not impede on any of the current laws, nor did it implicate anyone,” said Jack Lapauve Jr, EMTV’s deputy head of news. On Friday, journalists from EMTV were barred from entering the newsroom in their Port Moresby, Mount Hagen and Lae offices. With concerns that EMTV management may attempt to replace suspended journalists with new recruits, Gregory Moses, vice-president of PNG’s media council, made a call out to all journalists in the country not to accept job offers from EMTV and to stand united with fellow journalists from EMTV. “Respect our colleagues who are currently affected by the decisions of the management and do not join the mass recruitment done by EMTVs management,” he said. Vete did not respond to requests for comment. This is the third time in the past five years that a news manager at EMTV has been suspended. Scott Waide was reinstated after being briefly suspended in 2018 over a story that was aired during the 2018 Apec Meeting, and in 2019 Neville Choi was terminated on grounds of alleged insubordination in a move that reportedly caused outrage in the EMTV newsroom which saw Choi also reinstated.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-21T01:52:10Z'}, {'id': '620d48608f08fc958652768b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On a brisk winter day in February 1972, the 34-year-old American diplomat, Winston Lord, arrived in Beijing with his boss, Henry Kissinger, and president Richard Nixon. Barely an hour after they checked in to their guest house, a message came: “Chairman Mao wants to see president Nixon.” The urgency from Mao resonated with the excitement from the American delegation. The establishment of bilateral relations offered great opportunities for both sides in facing a common enemy: the Soviet Union. For more than two decades since the Chinese communists took over the mainland, Beijing and Washington had had no official contact on this scale. Much to his surprise, Lord was asked to go along into the meeting with Mao as a note-taker. Secretary of state William Rogers was not asked to attend and, so as not to upset Rogers, Nixon ordered Lord to be cropped out of the official photograph released to the press. “The meeting took place in Mao’s residence, in a medium-sized room filled with books and manuscripts, like a library,” Lord recalled in an interview with the Guardian. “The atmosphere was modest, compared to the enormity of the event. “Mao [also] bantered about how he and Chiang Kai-shek were enemies,” but Mao viewed it as essentially a “family quarrel”, Lord regaled, referring to the leader of the nationalists who fled to Taiwan after the defeat in the Chinese civil war in 1949.\nHe continued: “[Mao] said, ‘We don’t have to solve difficult problems – he didn’t say Taiwan specifically, but that’s what he was referring to – immediately.’ So basically he was saying we can postpone the Taiwan issue while we get on with areas we agree on, for example balancing the Soviet Union.” The week-long visit concluded with the signing of the Shanghai communique. On 27 February 1972, the United States “acknowledged” that “all Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China”. The US also reaffirmed “its interest in a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese themselves”. The trip was hailed as much a diplomatic breakthrough as a TV spectacular. When he landed at Andrews air force base outside Washington after the week in China, Nixon received a hero’s welcome led by his vice-president, Spiro Agnew. Life Magazine’s Hugh Sidey recalled the murmur of a fellow journalist next to him at the airport: “My God, it’s like the arrival of the king.” Years later, the visit inspired an opera.\nHalf a century on, this event has lost its sparkle in both capitals. In Washington, critics now question the wisdom of Nixon’s 1972 trip; many see China as an economic threat and – like Russia - a geopolitical enemy. In Beijing, there’s an increasingly louder view that the US is in its terminal decline and China’s system is ultimately superior. On 4 February, the leaders of China and Russia declared: “there are no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation,” in a clear message to the US. This month, as both countries mark the anniversary, Washington has been embroiled in a mind game with Moscow over whether Vladimir Putin is to launch a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Beijing, at the same time, was keen to remind Washington of what it sees as the biggest achievement of Nixon’s trip: the Shanghai communique and the status of the island of Taiwan. Speaking at a press conference on 10 February, China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, emphasised to his audience the phrase of “one China” – which in Beijing is called a “principle” but in Washington a “policy” – and said the document was “the political foundation for the normalisation of China-US relations and the establishment of diplomatic ties”. In January, China’s ambassador to Washington, Qin Gang, warned that the Taiwan issue was “the biggest tinderbox” between the two countries. He made it explicit that the US and China could face a military conflict “[i]f the Taiwanese authorities, emboldened by the United States, keep going down the road for independence”.\nOfficially, the US’s position on Taiwan remains one that reflects “strategic ambiguity”. It does not endorse Beijing’s claim to sovereignty over Taipei, nor does it regard the island as an independent country. Washington, however, is committed by law to provide Taiwan with the means to defend itself. Yet as the relations have soured, some – such as the Republican senator Ted Cruz – have suggested the US should make its commitment to Taiwan more explicit. The advocacy from Taipei is becoming more proactive, too. As the world watches the fate of Ukraine, Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, warned that Beijing “might be thinking about a military attack against Taiwan” after the Winter Olympics. “We are not asking for war … but we won’t bow to China,” he vowed. Some see the current state of play as inevitable and reflecting a structural issue between an incumbent power and a rising power. But Washington’s rethink of its China strategy began more than two decades ago when George Bush’s defence secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, presented him with a proposal to shift the US’s global strategic priorities towards Asia – and primarily China. “Many thought that once [Donald] Trump left the White House, tensions between the US and China would have decreased,” said Zeno Leoni of King’s College London and the author of American Grand Strategy from Obama to Trump. “However, the fallout at the Anchorage summit in Alaska, the endurance of trade sanctions, and a boycott of Olympic Games not seen since the cold war confirms that problems are structural.”\nLeoni saw a pattern in American grand strategy that encourages other countries, including former and potential rivals – Germany, Japan, China – to act as “locomotives” of a global economy that favours US interests. “However, this strategy has led to several ‘blowbacks’ in recent decades, including the rise of China,” he said. Lord insists Nixon’s approach to China half a century ago was “a brilliant strategic move”. “What was the alternative?” he asked. “If we didn’t open up to China, we certainly wouldn’t have had … the arms control agreement that we had within months with the Soviet Union. We would not have had either China’s or the Soviets’ help as much on ending the Vietnam war. We would not have restored American credibility at home and abroad. “The thing that China would never have emerged without our help is nonsense,” Lord continued. “Given the size of the Chinese population and the talents of the Chinese people, it clearly was going up sooner or later. When they began to emerge, what was the alternative? Trying to contain China? In addition to this being dangerous, it was impossible, because other countries wouldn’t join us. It would be ineffective.” But Leoni said whether Nixon’s China visit in 1972 was mistaken or not depended on whether we wanted to take the long view in history. “That meeting led to great global economic growth and to the end of the cold war. Yet it also was a selfish move that benefited the US, and the long-term implications of the rapprochement were not thought through enough at the time.”\nThe stakes are high, and mismanagement of the US-China relationship is “arguably the biggest short-term threat to peace”, said Robert Daly of the Woodrow Wilson Centre in Washington. For more than 30 years, Daly has been observing the evolution of the bilateral relationship from both capitals. Daly said observers tend to think of Nixon’s visit only as a big geopolitical chess game, but more significantly, that week in February 50 years ago opened the “floodgate” for people-to-people exchange. “It gave the people of both countries permission to interact.” “Before 1972, the two countries saw each other only through the lens of security. After Nixon’s visit, they began to view one another in their full humanity,” Daly said. “Sadly, we are now reverting back to seeing each other solely through a security lens.” Lord, now 84, said he did not agree with the prevailing view in Washington these days that America’s engagement with China had failed. He said the two countries were in the middle of a long strategic competition. “But we are not going to be close friends – and I hope we won’t be outright enemies for many decades to come.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-21T13:02:44Z'}, {'id': '62125d618f08fc958652b3f4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has invited Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden to attend a summit aimed at de-escalating the Ukraine crisis, and the leaders have agreed in principle, Macron’s office has announced, amid further US warnings that war is imminent. The Élysée Palace put out a statement on Sunday evening following last-minute diplomatic efforts by the French president to try to dissuade Russia from invading Ukraine. “Presidents Biden and Putin have each accepted the principle of such a summit,” the statement said. “Its content will be prepared by secretary of state Blinken and Minister [Sergei] Lavrov during their meeting on Thursday 24 February. It can only be held if Russia does not invade Ukraine.” The White House confirmed Biden’s readiness to hold a summit, but made clear it was wary about the sincerity of the offer. “President Biden accepted in principle a meeting with President Putin following that engagement, again, if an invasion hasn’t happened, the White House spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, said. “We are always ready for diplomacy. We are also ready to impose swift and severe consequences should Russia instead choose war. And currently, Russia appears to be continuing preparations for a full-scale assault on Ukraine very soon.”\nThere was no immediate comment from the Kremlin or the office of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Macron spoke twice to Vladimir Putin overnight, for a total of nearly three hours, consulting Joe Biden for 15 minutes in between the two calls. Amid a rising sense of urgency, the second Macron-Putin call was announced well after 2am in Moscow. The French president said he was seeking to establish a cease-fire in the east of the country, and that the two leaders had agreed to hold discussions in the hope of organising a leaders’ summit to review the future of European security arrangements. But the Kremlin account of the conversation focused on Putin’s allegations of Ukrainian escalation and shelling on the eastern front lines – claims contradicted by reports from the region. It did not respond to an offer of direct talks from Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president. Moscow rescinded its undertaking to end military exercises in Belarus which were due to conclude on Sunday, and the Belarus defence ministry said the Russian troops would remain there indefinitely. Satellite images showed more and more Russian combat units advance from staging area to within a few kilometres of the Ukrainian border, in many cases concealing themselves in forests. More than 150,000 Russian troops are estimated to be deployed around Ukraine, while substantial naval forces are off its Black Sea coast.\nBiden had been planning to travel to Delaware for a family event on Monday, a public holiday in the US, but canceled the trip on Sunday evening following a rare Sunday meeting of the national security council. US news networks cited intelligence assessment saying that Moscow had issued attack orders to commanders on the ground. The US secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, said: “Everything we are seeing suggests that this is dead serious, that we are on the brink of an invasion.”. He added: “...Until the tanks are actually rolling, and the planes are flying, we will use every opportunity and every minute we have to see if diplomacy can still dissuade President (Vladimir) Putin from carrying this forward.”\nEarlier, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, who also spoke to Macron on Sunday, warned that Russia plans to launch the biggest war in Europe since 1945 by attacking Ukraine in a “bloody and protracted conflict”. He said the west would use “all the pressure we can bring” to “make sure that this venture does not succeed”. The chink of diplomatic light came after Putin spoke on the phone with Macron, his favoured western interlocutor, on Sunday morning, and the outcome, broadly confirmed by the Kremlin, suggests Putin might be willing to step back from the brink of a full invasion of Ukraine to allow renewed diplomatic discussions. If he is not, he is instead involved in an elaborate deceit of the French. Under the plan, the French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, will meet with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, on Thursday to work on the possible summit at the highest level with Russia, Ukraine and allies, the Élysée said. The two leaders also agreed to resume work on a separate meeting “within the framework of the Normandy format”, meaning the participants will be Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany, Macron’s office and the Kremlin said. Putin and Macron would also work “intensively” to allow the Trilateral Contact Group – which includes Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe – to meet “in the next few hours” in an effort to secure a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine where government troops and pro-Russian separatists are facing each other, according to the Elysée statement. It is too early to say if Macron has pulled off a last-minute diplomatic coup, or if he will have the full support for his initiative from London. So far, most of the French president’s diplomatic moves have been coordinated with the White House. Gérard Araud, a former French diplomat, defended Macron, saying: “he is today the only western leader actively engaged in finding a peaceful way out of the current crisis. He does know that he may fail, and probably will, but he is right to try, and deserves our support and understanding.” The Élysée statement said “intense diplomatic work will take place in the coming days”, including several consultations in the French capital, adding that the two leaders also agreed on “the need to favour a diplomatic solution to the ongoing crisis and to do everything to achieve one”. An Élysée official confirmed further talks between the two leaders were scheduled, but said Putin and Macron clearly had “different interpretations” of what was happening in the Donbas region and who was to blame, with the French president arguing that pro-Russian separatists were responsible, and the Russian leader insisting it was Ukrainian forces. The Élysée official said Macron would be talking “in the next few hours” to the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. Further calls were likely to be placed to Johnson, the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi, and other close partners, the official said. They added that Putin had reiterated that Russia “intends to withdraw its troops” from Belarus once ongoing exercises were complete. “All this will have to be verified, and that could take some time,” the official said, noting that statements by the Belarus authorities “do not appear to match Putin’s words”. The Belarusian defence minister said Russia and Belarus were extending military drills that were due to end on Sunday, in a step that further intensifies pressure on Ukraine. The Kremlin said that in the phone call, Putin had expressed serious concern over the sharp deterioration of the situation on the line of contact in Donbas. The Russian statement added: “Taking into account the acuteness of the current state of affairs, the presidents considered it expedient to intensify the search for solutions through diplomatic means through the foreign ministries and political advisers to the leaders of the countries participating in the Normandy format. These contacts are designed to help restore the ceasefire and ensure progress in resolving the conflict around Donbas.” The Kremlin insisted Putin was not withdrawing any of his wider demands, saying he “reiterated the need for the United States and Nato to take Russian demands for security guarantees seriously and respond to them concretely and to the point”. It made no reference to Macron’s proposed leaders’ summit. The statement added that Putin blamed the escalation in Donbas on the provocations of the Ukrainian security forces, and that he complained of the continuing provision of modern weapons and ammunition to Ukraine by Nato countries, “which is pushing Kyiv towards a military solution to the so-called Donbas problem”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-21T08:07:18Z'}, {'id': '620d7cd08f0866a40a9d6ebe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We like predictability. We function best when we know what is going to happen. The irony here is that after all this uncertainty, predictability in this phase of the pandemic in New Zealand is increasing. As the Omicron wave gathers strength, we can most likely expect a version of what happened in other countries: a steep increase in case numbers, exerting pressure on the health and social care system. New Zealand’s successful management of the primary health impacts of the pandemic may have contributed to a sense of “kiwi exceptionalism”. This may be responsible for the jolt we may feel when we realise that what has happened elsewhere might actually happen in New Zealand, when, for most of this pandemic, our experience has been very different.\nSo, how do we negotiate this Omicron-fuelled period of predictable unpredictability? At the beginning of any crisis, there is a coming together which we can think of as a honeymoon period. But as we progress, life becomes more complex, and we realise that a return to some kind of regularity is further off and more complex than we first thought. The experience of togetherness that may have characterised the easiest stages of the pandemic has waned. Fast forward through a few waves of the pandemic, emerging variants, and ebbing and flowing of restrictions, and we arrive at a place where people’s expectations and needs about what happens next can differ from each other, sometimes greatly. Let’s consider two vaccinated groups that might represent opposite poles of a continuum of expectations and behaviour that we may see in the weeks to come. There are others, but bear with me. First, there’s the “vaccinated-and-done”: they’ve had their two shots, and had their booster dose too. They have no other health concerns in their lives or for their family or community. They are being sensible about other public health precautions but, to a large extent, their behaviour is set. They’ve done what they can to contribute to collective good outcomes, they’re still exercising good judgment, and they want to continue living as they have done during the pandemic. They feel well protected in this environment – they feel safe within this uncertainty. The other group is the “vaccinated-and-cautious”: they have similar vaccine protection, but they also have more complex health concerns. Perhaps they have personal vulnerabilities, or their family members do. They will be more cautious about engaging in society than the “vaccinated-and-done”. In their intersection of safety with uncertainty, their actual capacity for safety may be lower than others because of underlying health conditions, or living with vulnerable people. So despite being vaccinated, they will regulate their sense of safety by reducing their exposure to the virus by managing their movements in public more tightly. There is potential here for misunderstanding and damage to social cohesion. The “vaccinated-and-cautious” may see actions of the “vaccinated-and done” (or others) going about everyday life as recklessness, which adds to their feelings of being unsafe. This may drive them to increase their sense of safety through reducing their exposure to the Omicron hazard, for example, by pulling their children out of school. However, from the point of view of the “vaccinated-and-done”, they may see the reticence of the “vaccinated-and-cautious” as contributing to their sense of frustration that life isn’t like it was before.\nHow do we solve this? In our daily lives, we understand that being considerate is the oil that greases the wheels and helps us to get through. We all bring our own personal strengths, vulnerabilities and experiences to any interaction, and that includes this pandemic. Life can be tough for everyone and we never know what another person may experience or what their vulnerabilities may be, be they invisible health concerns, or economic concerns about failing businesses exacerbated through the cascading impacts of the pandemic. So, when you can be considerate, take that option. But in order to be considerate, pause before reacting. In uncertain times, it’s easy to feel stressed, irritated and to lash out at others, and that can make a tough situation worse. Try to pause and breathe before reacting, and consider whether you need to make that comment. Finding that sweet spot to live safely in an uncertain environment is going to take a lot of invisible work for many people, especially where the government has clarified that this is now a shared responsibility and that they will be less restrictive and directive in the future. There is work to be done in building a shared agenda and action plan for what is yet to come, as well as a shared sense of just-enough-safety-for-most in a continued uncertain environment. But, as we face the Omicron wave, let’s recognise we have come this far together, and that considerate care for each other will always be the bedrock of our social cohesion and successful journey through this pandemic. Dr Sarb Johal is a clinical psychologist, strategic communications adviser, and the author of Finding Calm: Managing fear and anxiety in an uncertain world', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-20T23:43:48Z'}, {'id': '62126d258f08fc958652b4c9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson will proclaim that the lifting of all remaining Covid restrictions in England this week marks a “moment of pride” when he unveils the government’s long-term strategy for living with the virus, despite concerns from scientists, health experts and Labour that the move is premature. The legal requirement for anyone with Covid to isolate will be ditched a month earlier than planned, while free PCR and lateral flow tests for everyone will be axed to rein in public spending and attempt to restore people’s confidence that life can return to normality. The tests will reportedly be kept for the over-80s. The national contact tracing service is expected to be wound down and schoolchildren will no longer be told to get tested twice a week. Fresh guidance is expected to be issued, similar to that already published about seasonal flu, designed to let individuals make their own judgments about the risk of catching or transmitting Covid. Following meetings over the weekend the cabinet will be assembled to rubber stamp the plans on Monday before a Commons statement by the prime minister and a press conference in the evening, likely to feature the government’s two leading pandemic advisers, Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance. The changes will be announced on Monday and start to come into effect from later in the week. On Sunday Johnson insisted the country was “in a different world” from when the pandemic started and said he wanted to “shift the balance” away from rules to advice for dealing with Covid. He told the BBC that people should still be careful and that coronavirus “remains a dangerous disease” for vulnerable and unvaccinated people, but said it was time “to see our country really getting back on its feet”, with workers going back to their offices “in the normal way”. To prepare for the threat of new variants emerging, it is understood that some measures will be kept in reserve. Health sources suggested these could include lab capacity for sequencing tests and back up contact tracing and mobile testing.\nSo far, 91.4% of those eligible for a vaccine have had their first dose, falling to 85% for the second and 66.1% for the third. Daily case numbers have fallen to around a fifth of the record peak seen at the start of January 2022, while deaths have remained below 200 a day for the past week. Labour argued the move to scrap all remaining Covid restrictions was premature, and accused ministers of wanting to “declare victory before the war is over”. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said Johnson was acting like a football manager whose team was 2-1 up in the closing minutes of a game and decided to take off the best defender. “I’m not clear that the scientific advice supports this,” he said, adding that he stood with those groups who had raised concerns, such as the NHS Confederation, World Health Organization and British Medical Association, “any day of the week and twice on Sunday”. He accused Johnson of having been motivated by “political weakness, not by public health”. Tory MPs welcomed the move, particularly given it would “put daylight between us and the opposition”. However, one critic of the prime minister said it had “been brought forward as a galvanising effort for the party” given the pressure Johnson is under for being investigated by police over parties at No 10 during lockdown. A source claimed no modelling had been commissioned by the government to examine the possible effect on Covid rates of charging for tests. David Spiegelhalter, professor of public understanding of risk at the University of Cambridge, said there was significant uncertainty about the impact of the plans.\n“I can see the figures are looking encouraging, but the consequences are very difficult to predict. It may be fine, it may not be,” he said – adding that surveillance of the virus should continue through the Office for National Statistics’ infection survey. Dr Michael Head, a senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton, said Johnson’s plans were the “latest in a long line of reckless policies”. “Keeping some measures in place, including, for example, the requirement to wear masks in indoor spaces and requirements to self-isolate for a few more weeks would be helpful,” he said. “Breaking chains of transmission means there would be fewer people unwell and in hospital, healthcare resources would be freer to address their extensive backlogs, and more people would have received their booster doses thus ensuring they are better protected.” Experts have expressed particular concern about clinically extremely vulnerable people, for whom Covid still poses a more serious risk. The specialist guidance that has been in place for much of the pandemic is not expected to continue. Gemma Peters, chief executive of Blood Cancer UK, said that the government had “deliberately abandoned” this group. Removing free lateral flow tests would “create a massive health inequality” for clinically vulnerable people whose friends, family and colleagues could not afford to take tests before contact, Peters said, while removing the requirement to self-isolate would further ramp up “risk and anxiety”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-21T00:02:25Z'}, {'id': '62119e9e8f08fc958652acba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When thousands of protesters against Covid restrictions arrived in Ottawa last month, it would have seemed unimaginable that they would take over parts of the Canadian capital with little resistance.\nTo their own disbelief, the rightwing protesters soon controlled the streets outside parliament, brazenly flouting the law in the belief nothing could or would stop them. This weekend, however, the blockade ended in incredulity, accusations of betrayal and questions over the future of the protest movement. On Friday and Saturday, hundreds of officers conducted one of Canada’s largest police operations, working to clear Parliament Hill and the surrounding area of trucks, camper vans and structures that had blocked roads for nearly a month, in protest of coronavirus-related public health restrictions and, in general, the government of Justin Trudeau. Deploying riot squads, mounted units and armed vehicles, police cleared large parts of the area. By Sunday morning, more than 191 had been arrested and 57 vehicles had been towed. Protesters remained in some areas but Wellington Street, in front of Parliament Hill, was empty. A sense of normalcy was on the horizon for residents of Ottawa but police warned the operation wasn’t finished. “We are in this until it is over,” interim chief Steve Bell said, as officers worked to end the “unlawful occupation”. The rapid dismantling of the blockades stood in stark contrast to weeks of bold protest as truckers flouted bylaws, blaring horns at all hours. Even as police threatened to break up the blockades and the prime minister, Trudeau, invoked the Emergencies Act, many protesters were unfazed, arguing police didn’t have the authority to break up the protests. Key influencers in the movement, including Pat King, repeatedly reinforced this message. “King told protesters the warnings from police weren’t official because they didn’t have signatures on them or that the city didn’t have a police chief so no one could give the order,” said Kurt Phillips of the Canadian Anti-Hate Network. “And he was telling this to people who don’t really understand how government works.” But in the waning days of the blockade, amid reports some leaders had their bank accounts frozen, defiance gave way to uncertainty. The night before the police operation, some drivers left the city after trucking companies, fearing ruin, ordered them home. Still, even as police swarmed the area on Friday, many protesters expressed disbelief that arrests were possible. “You can’t do this. You can’t do this. You have no right,” pleaded one woman as a line of police pushed towards a blockade on Rideau Street. Another broke down in tears as protesters were hauled off. As footage of arrests and scuffles spread, on the secure-messaging site Telegram groups supporting the truckers reacted with shock and skepticism. One user claimed the officers were with the United Nations, part of a common conspiracy theory which holds that Canada’s government is linked to globalist networks. “If they had this many officers, there would be no crime in the city,” the user wrote. A number of police forces, including the Ottawa city police, the Ontario provincial police, the Royal Canadian Mounted police and the Sûreté du Québec, participated in the operation to clear the streets. Others were told, often by protest leaders and organizers, the police supported their movement. “They honestly believe that all of Canada supports them. And so it’s shocking to them to learn they aren’t seen as heroes,” said Carmen Celestini, a postdoctoral fellow with the Disinformation Project at Simon Fraser University, adding that many believed police officers were on their side. “And now they’ve realized that’s not true.” Police arrested nearly all protest leaders who called on demonstrators to “hold the line”. But the perceived ease with which some handed themselves over sparked a sense of betrayal. One user on a Telegram group accused Tamara Lich, the lead fundraiser, of having ties to the financier George Soros. “A lot of patriotic Canadian[s] were duped into believing this [convoy] was real,” the user wrote. Benjamin Dichter, a protest leader, called on supporters to stand their ground but left Ottawa before he could be arrested. His decision prompted one Telegram user to call him a “globalist operative subverting the freedom convoy”. “Influential figures were really pushing disinformation to keep the protesters there,” said Celestini. “But even though they told supporters to ‘hold the line’, they really didn’t have a plan for what to do when arrests occurred. The leaders knew that they would have an escape plan and that they’d be OK. But their decision to leaving their supporters out there to face the consequences helps you see their character.”\nThe conspiracy theories and populist anger underpinning the truckers’ moment are unlikely to disappear. Experts said supporters will likely try to spin the result of the barricade as a victory or the catalyst for a bigger war. Furthermore, mainstream and fringe politicians have started vying for influence among the movement’s supporters. “There are a number of politicians looking to use this as a springboard,” said Phillips, warning of a “disruptive force” in Canadian politics. False rumours of a woman killed by a police horse have spread throughout Canada and into the US, amplified by far-right figures. Celestini worries such misinformation, rapidly spread by live streaming and encrypted chat networks, will be a problem. “We’ve been ignoring people like this for decades. But now we’re seeing the fruits of how we ignored and dismissed people who believed these things,” she said. “The distrust that people have in institutions will remain. And that leave a real possibility for something similar to fester or grow.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-20T19:16:32Z'}, {'id': '621277c28f08fc958652b552', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Italian ambassador to Australia has died after falling from a balcony in her home town in Foligno in the Umbria region. According to reports, Ambassador Francesca Tardioli, 56, was found dead outside her house after apparently falling from the third floor. The incident is being investigated by the police in Italy. “Heartbreaking news on the passing of Ambassador Francesca Tardioli. Dear friend. Brilliant colleague. Greatly respected diplomat,” wrote Australia’s ambassador to Italy, Margaret Twomey, on Twitter. “Our thoughts are with her family, friends.’’ Twomey described Tardioli as one of Italy’s greatest gifts to Australia. The embassy and Italy’s foreign affairs ministry also mourned her on social media. ‘’It is with profound sorrow that we weep for the loss of Francesca Tardioli and join the family’s grief. She was a great diplomat and servant of the State,’’ said the Italy’s foreign ministry on Twitter. “She allegedly lost her balance while leaning over her balcony,’’ Italian news agency AGI reported. Tardioli, who held the position of ambassador since September 2019 and was fluent in English and French and had a good knowledge of German and Spanish. She joined the Italian National Diplomatic Service in 1991.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-20T17:40:20Z'}, {'id': '621236948f086f7273b89e87', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian officials have accused international monitors working in the conflict zone in the country’s east of succumbing to pro-Russian bias, after the mission was depleted when the US, British and Canadian governments withdrew their citizens. The mission, run by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), is made up of hundreds of unarmed monitors, often former diplomats from OSCE member states. Their armoured vehicles crisscross the territory on both sides of the lines to report ceasefire violations. As Moscow looks ready to exploit the tense situation in the conflict zone to provide a pretext for the further invasion of Ukraine, the work of the monitors is more important than ever. However, just when they are most needed, their ability to work has been hampered by the decision by several countries to evacuate, due to the risk of a Russian invasion. “We have asked for France and Germany to increase the number of monitors they have in place, and we want the OSCE to return to working according to its mandate,” said the Ukrainian deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereschuk, speaking on Saturday in Stanytsia Luhanska, a town in Ukrainian-controlled territory right on the frontline. Russia insists Ukraine is planning an offensive in the east. Ukraine and western countries believe Russian claims of escalation are merely a smokescreen to give it a pretext to launch a military assault. “It’s very important for everyone to understand that it’s the Russian Federation that’s behind this. Ukraine has no offensive plans,” said Vereschuk, after a visit to a kindergarten in Stanytsia Luhanska that was shelled on Thursday. Impact marks suggest the kindergarten was hit from the south, where the Russia-backed separatists have positions, but Russian media have suggested the incident could have been a setup. Although journalists were given access to the scene on Thursday and again on Saturday, in their daily report the OSCE said its staff were not permitted to approach closer than 50 metres to the school and were thus “unable to determine the weapons used or the direction of fire”. “This did not happen,” said Vereschuk. “Unfortunately, we are able to state that the OSCE special monitoring mission was not completely objective about the situation with the kindergarten.” Serhiy Haidai, the Kyiv-appointed governor of Luhansk region, went further, suggesting the departure of British, American and Canadian monitors had led to a pro-Russian bias. “Those who are left are representatives of Russia and the former Soviet countries, and they can look at things very one-sidedly. They don’t go where they know they will find proof of shelling of civilian buildings, but they are very happy to look at our military installations, and this creates a big question for us,” he told the Guardian in Stanytsia Luhanska. The mission’s 680 monitors come from more than 40 countries, and the withdrawn American, British, Canadian and Dutch delegations represent 57, 40, 28 and seven people respectively, according to a January OSCE report. The OSCE mission has long come under suspicion on both sides of the lines, though impediments to work on the separatist side have usually been more frequent and greater. “The Ukrainians were always suspicious of the Russian and Belarusian monitors, while the separatists were suspicious of Americans and Poles,” said Nikolaus von Twickel, a Berlin-based analyst who previously worked for the mission. A spokesperson for the mission did not comment on the Ukrainian accusations, but after this article was published, the Twitter account of the mission posted a message from the chief monitor: “In response to a media item today, I underline that all staff are bound by the mission’s code of conduct – the ethical principles and norms of the OSCE – and perform their duties impartially and neutrally.” Sources inside the OSCE mission dismissed Ukrainian claims of bias. “The idea that a change in personnel would influence the report … This just isn’t how it works. There are so many layers of checks,” said one source inside the mission, who spoke on condition of anonymity. However, there is great unease at the decision by some countries to withdraw monitors. In a video call with about 450 staff last Monday, the head of the monitoring mission, Yaşar Halit Çevik, said evacuated staff with office jobs would not be able to work remotely, according to one source who was on the call. Çevik also said that if monitors from countries that had not ordered evacuations were worried about the situation, they could take annual leave. Many staff have done so, further depleting the mission. One member of the mission described the OSCE plans for evacuation if there is a Russian escalation as “shaky at best, and still in progress”, which was a factor that led many to opt to take leave. However, among the monitors stationed in the most dangerous parts of eastern Ukraine there is a feeling that the US, British and Canadian withdrawal is an overreaction. “There is a strong opinion among colleagues that it’s a bad idea,” said one monitor, from a country that has not evacuated its citizens. “There are colleagues who served in Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq. People knew they were signing up to be sent into a war zone. And now, when the mission is more important than ever before, they are being pulled out.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-20T21:11:54Z'}, {'id': '62125c098f08fc958652b3d6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The first stop for Ella Fyodorova after she fled her home in eastern Ukraine was a windblown tent camp just across the Russian border, part of a mass evacuation effort that observers fear may become the pretext for Russia to launch a formal intervention in Ukraine. “I wanted to stay, but my husband came home, and said: ‘Get your things together, we’re going,’” she said as she wrestled her two-year-old son into a blue snowsuit to walk to the public toilets nearby. The recent escalation in fighting had not touched her home city of Starobesheve, she said, but warnings from the Russian-backed separatist government of an imminent attack by Ukraine had driven many families to gather their children and flee. Her husband, who dropped her at the border, had to turn back. Now she sat in the dim light of a medical tent alongside other mothers holding their children, all waiting for the next bus to take them further into Russia. Many left carrying just the basics: clothing, medicine, some food.\n“I don’t know where we’re going,” she said. “I don’t know anything. Tomorrow we need to start searching for a place to live.” Other evacuees who spoke with the Guardian during a recent trip to the Rostov border region said they left because of the resumption of heavy artillery fire that reminded them of the most dangerous phase of the war in 2014. “It’s dangerous – I live by the airport so I heard salvoes all night… until four in the morning I couldn’t fall asleep,” said Natalia Klimchuk, 35, who was there with her three-year-old daughter. “I got my daughter and said, ‘It’s time to get out of here.’” There is evidence suggesting that the sudden evacuations of the Russian-controlled areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were planned and likely to have been designed to set the stage for a formal Russian intervention in the country’s east. The leaders of the Russian proxy states in eastern Ukraine filmed their announcements of the evacuations days before they were made public, according to video metadata.\nBut for the women, children, and others who are being evacuated, the result is undeniably real and traumatic, as they arrive by the hundreds in a neighbouring region that appears unprepared for the tide of evacuees. In the early chaos of that effort, some said they felt like pawns in a larger game. “Maybe they’ll shoot and then it will quiet down,” said Viktoria from Donetsk, who was also at the tent camp on the border. “I think it’s a farce, though. Like when there’s a fuss and then that’s all … a staged event.” More than 300 evacuees were sent to the Krasny Desant sanatorium just 20 miles from the border. Inside, children ran through the hallways as their parents filled out intake forms and received small handouts such as sim cards. The grounds were patrolled by police, including at least one officer with an automatic rifle (they forced a Guardian correspondent to leave the sanatorium).\nIn a nearby church, Natalia Chetveryakova, 61, said the seaside camp had housed evacuees in 2014 when the war began in eastern Ukraine and had even hosted refugees in 2008 after the Georgian war. Some said they were happy to be placed so close to the border and were thankful for the stipend of 10,000 roubles (£95) that the Russian government has promised to give to evacuees. Others expected better conditions. Beckoning us into her room, where she was staying with her daughter and granddaughter, Sonya, seven, Lyudmila Barskaya showed off the spartan but liveable conditions with an air of resign. “Here are the beds, and that’s all there is,” she said. “All you can do is cry. I understand that it’s like this for us. But nothing more for the children?” Organisation has been a problem. A day earlier, 150 evacuees from Donetsk arrived at a nearby sanatorium only to be told there was no space for them. “We made a mistake when we chose to leave,” one told a reporter for Meduza. A similar scene unfolded at the Congress hotel in nearby Taganrog, where buses full of stressed and tired evacuees arrived only to be turned away. Other residents in the Russian-controlled territories have decided to ignore the evacuation order and stay at home. “We have been hearing about Ukrainian attacks for years – I don’t think it is different this time,” said Tamara Fomina, 64, a pensioner from Donetsk, the largest city in the region. Almost half of the prewar population of 3.8 million left the separatist-controlled Donbas areas after the unrest in 2014, and those who stayed appeared to be numb to the separatist warnings of a Ukrainian invasion. “This is my home; we have been through a lot. If I die, I die, so let it be! But I am not leaving this house to go to live in some tent in Rostov,” Fomina said in a telephone interview.\nBut many are taking steps to prepare for an uncertain future. After the mass evacuation announcement, photographs showed people standing in long lines to use a cash machine in Donetsk. On Saturday, the central bank of the self-proclaimed Donetsk republic announced a maximum withdrawal limit of 10,000 roubles a day from ATMs. “There are lines everywhere. Lines for gas, for money, for food. People are worried shops won’t buy new supplies,” said Donetsk local Vlada Vologina, 34. Vologina also claimed that public transport in Donetsk was paralysed because authorities used the city’s buses as part of the mass evacuation operation. Some men in Donetsk expressed worry after receiving call-up papers ordering them to report to the headquarters of the local militia on Sunday. “When I came back from work last night, I saw the paper in my mailbox. This is all moving very fast,” said Vadim, who asked for his last name to be withheld.\n“I don’t know who is at fault for all of this, but I don’t want war. My wife is pregnant and fighting a war was never in my plans,” he added, saying he was still undecided whether he would go to the militia headquarters. Meanwhile, there are signs that Russia is ramping up the evacuation efforts: a local sporting facility has been converted into a makeshift centre for more than 300 evacuees and buses are taking more to a local train station, where they were put on a train destined for Nizhny Novgorod on Sunday. Some of those arriving at the station did not realise they were being sent hundreds of miles north. Some said they believe the latest events will force Russia to step in and officially recognise or even annex the territories that it has run as proxies since 2014. “All of us who left are thinking and hoping that this is the last time,” said Elena Kravchenko, a post office worker from the Starobesheve district. “That [Russia] will come in and clean them out.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-20T17:26:41Z'}]}