{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': ' ICC prosecutor to investigate possible war crimes in Ukraine', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-28T20:56:44Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/28/ukraine-russia-belarus-war-crimes-investigation-the-hague', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Belarus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus'}, {'tagTitle': 'International criminal court', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/law/international-criminal-court'}, {'tagTitle': 'Law', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/law/law'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Julian Borger', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/julianborger'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Top stories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/topstories'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '621d3f5e8f08a5262b543b2b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson’s nationality and borders bill has suffered four defeats in the House of Lords, including the removal of a crucial plank of the government’s immigration strategy. Clause 11 of the bill would have allowed refugees to be divided into two classes based on how they arrived in the UK. Peers voted by 204 to 126, defeating the clause by a majority of 78. If the clause had remained, people who made their own way to the UK would be given an inferior form of protection with more limited rights, compared with those who arrived through government-sanctioned routes. It meant that anyone arriving in the UK by an illegal route, such as by a small boat across the Channel, could have their claim ruled as inadmissible, receive a jail sentence of up to four years, have no recourse to public funds, and could have their family members barred from joining them. Monday was the first of three days of debate during the bill’s report stage. After that, changes made in the Lords will return to the Commons. The government could then accept the changes imposed by the Lords or challenge them. Steve Crawshaw, the policy director of Freedom from Torture, said the vote had delivered a bloody nose for the government. “The cruelty and illegality of the nationality and borders bill, for Ukrainian and other refugees, was never in doubt. This resounding victory means that even this government, a stranger to the truth and humanity, cannot avoid confronting that,” he said. Speaking against the clause, the refugee campaigner and Labour peer Lord Dubs said people fleeing Afghanistan and Ukraine “give the lie to the idea that somehow you can get here by the sort of route that the Home Office approves of”. All four defeats came at the report stage of the controversial nationality and borders bill. Peers also amended the Bill to scrap a controversial measure that would allow people to be stripped of their British citizenship without warning. The House of Lords supported by 209 votes to 173, majority 36, a move to strike the proposed power from legislation. Under existing law, deprivation of citizenship can be carried out for those people considered to pose a threat to the UK – including terrorism or war crimes – or if they obtained their citizenship fraudulently. The bill was supposed to enable citizenship to be removed without notice if it would “not be reasonably practicable”, and in the interests of national security. Maya Foa, director of the non-profit organisation Reprieve, said: “Government’s powers to strip citizenship are already the broadest in the G20. They are used disproportionately against people from ethnic minority communities. MPs must listen, and strike this discriminatory provision from the bill.” Home Office examples of where they would strip citizenship without notification include if someone is in a war zone or if informing them would reveal sensitive intelligence sources.\nPeers also defeated the government’s plan to stop the relatives of exiled Chagos islanders from being entitled to British citizenship. The House of Lords backed by 237 votes to 154, majority 83, a move that would allow descendants of a person born before 1983 on the Chagos Islands to register as a British overseas territories citizen and as a British citizen. Arguing the need for the amendment to the bill, Labour peer Lady Lister said it aimed to tackle the “injustice” faced by descendants of Chagossians who were evicted by the British government. She said: “Those descendants are now denied the right to register as citizens that they would have had were they still resident in their homeland. The reason they are denied that right is because they are no longer resident, but that is because they have been exiled from that homeland by the British government.” • The headline and text of this article were amended on 11 March 2022. Clause 11 of the bill limited the rights of refugees who arrive by an irregular route, but did not criminalise them as an earlier version indicated.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-11T16:19:04Z'}, {'id': '621d26f28f08f95332401cd3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian oligarch, who is part of a financial network known as “Putin’s wallet” in Moscow, according to the EU, is one of 26 businessmen, officials and military figures who have been added to the bloc’s expanding sanctions list. Sergei Roldugin, 71, the former principal cellist of the Kirov Opera Theatre’s orchestra in the 1980s and godfather to Putin’s eldest daughter, Maria, is among those who it is claimed are threatening the territorial integrity of Ukraine.\nHe joins a total of 680 individuals and 53 entities whose assets in EU member states are frozen and who are under a travel ban. The latest listings include oligarchs and businessmen active in the oil, banking and finance sectors, as well as government officials, military figures and media personalities in Russia. The invasion of Ukraine has prompted a raft of sanctions on Russian individuals, institutions and companies in wide-ranging measures that have helped send the Russian economy into turmoil. Notably, a number of those targeted are described as being within Putin’s small circle of good friends. The legal text approved by EU foreign ministers on Monday evening, says: “Mr Roldugin is a businessman with close ties to Vladimir Putin. He is part of Putin’s network financial scheme. He owns at least 5 offshore entities and he keeps his assets at Bank Rossiya (sanctioned by the Union), known in Moscow as ‘Putin’s wallet’.\n“According to the investigation of the ICIJ, Mr Roldugin is responsible for ‘shuffling’ at least 2 billion USD through banks and offshore companies as a part of Putin’s hidden financial network. “He also took part in ‘Troika Laundromat’, and he funnelled billions of USD through the system. Moreover, he received more than 69 million USD through companies within the ‘Troika Laundromat.’” The Troika laundromat is the name given to a collection of 70 offshore shell companies whose controllers used them to move billions of dollars of private wealth from Russia to the west. The network is said to have worked like a washing machine: money arrived from multiple sources and was then “spun” between network companies and sometimes between multiple bank accounts belonging to a single company.\nOthers on the list, include Igor Sechin, 61, the chief executive of Rosneft, the state oil company and one of the world’s largest crude oil producers.\nHe is described by the EU as “one of Vladimir Putin’s most trusted and closest advisers, as well as his personal friend” who is in contact with him on a daily basis. “Igor Sechin’s Rosneft was involved in financing the vineyards of the palace complex near Gelendzhik, which is considered to be personally used by President Putin,” the EU text said. A former KGB colleague of Putin’s, Nikolay Tokarev, 71, who is chief executive of Transneft, a major Russian oil and gas company, is also sanctioned.\nThe text said: “He is Vladimir Putin’s long-time acquaintance and close associate. He served together with Putin in the KGB in 1980s. Mr Tokarev is one of the Russian state oligarchs who assumed control over large state assets in the 2000s as President Putin consolidated power, and who operate in close partnership with the Russian state … “Nikolay Tokarev’s Transneft is one of the main sponsors of the palace complex near Gelendzhik which is widely considered to be personally used by President Putin.”\nAlisher Usmanov, 68, a businessman who operates in the iron ore and steel, media and internet sectors and is said by the EU to be “one of Vladimir Putin’s favourite oligarchs”, is included.\n“Mr Usmanov has reportedly fronted for President Putin and solved his business problems,” the EU text said. “According to FinCEN files, he paid $6m to Vladimir Putin’s influential adviser Valentin Yumashev. “Dmitry Medvedev, the deputy chairman of the Security Council of Russia and former president and prime minister of Russia, benefited from the personal use of luxurious residences controlled by Mr Usmanov.” Others listed are: Petr Aven, 64, who has been friends with Putin since the 1990s and is among 50 wealthy businessmen who regularly meet the Russian president; Mikhail Fridman, 55, a key shareholder of the Alfa bank which helped Putin’s eldest daughter, Maria, run a charity project, Alfa-Endo; and Dmitri Peskov, 54, who is Putin’s press secretary.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-01T14:27:11Z'}, {'id': '621d0bdf8f08f95332401b0c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The prosecutor of the international criminal court (ICC) in The Hague has announced that he will launch an investigation into possible war crimes or crimes against humanity in Ukraine. Karim Khan said that although Ukraine was not a member of the ICC, it had awarded jurisdiction to the court. He said that there was grounds to open an investigation based on a previous preliminary investigation on Crimea and the Donbas published last year, and on current events in Ukraine. “I have already tasked my team to explore all evidence preservation opportunities,” Khan, a British lawyer, said. He said that he could go to ICC judges to approve the inquiry, but it would be faster if an ICC member state referred the case to his office, “which would allow us to actively and immediately proceed with the office’s independent and objective investigations”.\nEarlier in the day, Lithuania had called on the ICC to open an investigation into possible war crimes committed by Russia and Belarus in Ukraine. Lithuania’s prime minister, Ingrida Simonyte, told the Washington Post: “What Putin is doing is just a murder and nothing else, and I hope he will be in The Hague.” With evidence mounting of Russia’s use of indiscriminate cluster munitions on Ukrainian cities, and the leveling of residential buildings in Kharkiv in particular, the government in Kyiv is also preparing a case against Moscow to take to The Hague.\nUkraine has also taken Russia to the international court of justice (ICJ) for having launched an invasion on the pretext of false claims of genocide perpetrated against the country’s Russian speakers. David Bosco, an expert on international justice at Indiana University, said the ICJ submission “is kind of a symbolic move by Ukraine”. “That’s not going to yield very much because it’s not actually clear that ICJ is going to have jurisdiction,” Bosco said. “And then even if they do, it’s something that would take a long, long time.” Even before Khan’s announcement several groups had started to collate war crimes evidence for use for future trials at the ICC or elsewhere. Eliot Higgins, the founder of the Bellingcat investigative journalism agency, said the group was working with other organisations to preserve evidence that would be accepted in court. “We’ve been working on issues related to accountability using open source evidence for a long time, so we’re very familiar with the needs of stakeholders like the ICC,” Higgins said. “Our goal would then be to make that data available to any accountability process that wants to use it. We aim to have, at a minimum, date and geolocation data, and then work to add other data, such as the type of violation documented, munitions featured in videos, etc.” Khan’s predecessor as ICC prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, announced in 2020 that there was enough evidence from the conflict in eastern Ukraine and Crimea to launch an investigation but the ICC judges did not give their approval. Khan said that, after reviewing Bensouda’s case, “I am satisfied that there is a reasonable basis to believe that both alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity have been committed in Ukraine.” Bosco said that in the wake of the Lithuanian submission, Khan would not have to seek the judges’ approval to launch a new investigation, and so could move swiftly to start work. “If the ICC is going to investigate, that means from their perspective they have jurisdiction over any Russians on Ukrainian territory and over any crimes committed on Ukrainian territory,” Bosco said. “But it’s got to be either war crimes, crime against humanity or genocide.” The Rome statute, the ICC’s founding document, was amended in 2018 to include the crime of aggression. However, in his statement, Khan said he did not have jurisdiction to investigate that crime because neither Russia nor Ukraine are signatories to the Rome statute.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-02T21:52:27Z'}, {'id': '621d0fb68f08a5262b5438af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Today was my son’s birthday. He is 16. He wanted a party with friends and his favourite cake from the local bakery – the super chocolate one – like any other child. But last night, like the previous ones, he slept on the bathroom floor, because this is the safest place in our apartment – and it is definitely more convenient than the dark basement of our apartment building or on the steps of the subway. My day started at 7am. It was the first day in the last five when I had been able to fall asleep and I woke up not from the sounds of an explosion, but just like all normal people on this planet. While my son was still sleeping, I tried to contact my elderly sick parents who live in a suburb occupied by the Russian invaders. Due to a damaged electrical substation, there has been no electricity there and poor mobile connection for five days. Shops and pharmacies are closed. It is almost impossible to escape from there without risk of being injured because of the constant shooting on the Kharkiv ring road. There are already checkpoints where Russian troops only let the locals leave in the direction of Belgorod, a border town where Russian propaganda TV cameras are looking forward to filming “rescued” Ukrainian refugees. I had hoped that after the Ukrainian army and self-defence forces succeeded in repelling the attack on Kharkiv, my parents would be able to join relatives in a safer zone of the region.\nBut they can’t. Armed “liberators” are still there, although it’s already quite clear that all they might liberate Ukrainians from is the normal and comfortable life in our own country that we had before. After making sure that my mother was feeling better and because there had been no explosions yet, I decided to fulfil the promise I’d given my son: a chocolate cake. We took four eggs, flour, sugar and started mixing, following a recipe from the internet. The cake was already in the oven when my husband cried: “Hurry for cover! Air raid siren! Planes are flying from Belgorod! Turn off the electrical devices, fast!” We grabbed our phones and ran. The explosions hit our new house, the yard, the car park. It’s really hard to define how long it lasted, probably not long. But by the time it was over and we had got back home, the fluffy cake had turned into a terrible flat, dry brown pancake. I sat down on the chair and began to cry for the first time. My husband tried to comfort me, suspecting that I was frightened.\n“I’m not scared, no! I just wanted to bake a birthday cake for my child in the middle of this hell! I can’t bake him a cake, you know, I’m unable to do it! How the fuck could this happen? Why can’t my son have his happy and sweet 16?” In regular life, tears are not really my thing at all: I’m much more tough stone than an emotional person. But today I gave up. While my husband went to inspect the damage to the car, I was pondering about how and where I could get a chocolate cake. After all, the candles were waiting. I hugged my son: “Sweetie, you know, I did not want a birthday like this for you. The cake is ruined. I’m sorry.” “I understand everything, mum, that’s fine,” he said. “We’ll buy one when it’s all over. I’ll become a lawyer and sue them in The Hague, you’ll see. All is well, honestly.” By then, people across Kharkiv were posting disturbing videos of explosions in our and other parts of the city: broken windows cluster bombs sticking out of the sidewalks. My husband came in with the news and said that we would have to take doors off our furniture to board up the windows, to protect ourselves from flying glass. We only finished renovating our apartment last year, but I knew I had to pull myself together. “Get it together. We need a plan B,” I told myself, taking out the remaining butter and cocoa. “There is no Russian warship that can stop me, a Ukrainian, from making a birthday cake for my child. So, be sure – we will definitely win.” Natalie Slyusar is an entrepreneur and civil society activist in Kharkiv', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-01T09:23:16Z'}, {'id': '621cec888f08ab197f3f9b49', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Natalia Balasynovych, the mayor of Vasylkiv, woke up at 5.13am last Thursday and thought there was a fireworks display outside. She quickly realised that, in fact, Vladimir Putin had launched an assault on Ukraine. Missiles were raining down on her town. Vasylkiv is a pleasant, quiet town of 36,000 people about 20 miles outside Kyiv. But it contains a military airfield, and is home to one of Ukraine’s four air defence control centres. This meant it was an early target for the Russians, who want control of the airfield to land troops and launch an advance on Kyiv from the south. Balasynovych had read all the speculation about a possible Russian invasion, and as mayor had gone over drills of what to do if it really happened. But “in her soul”, she said, she never believed it was possible. As she jumped out of bed on Thursday, it was soon clear she had been wrong. “I had 10 minutes of panic when I was running around the house and I had no idea what to do. Then I pulled myself together and went to work,” she said, speaking at an interview in a fortified building in the town, guarded by armed volunteers, where the local administration is working to keep the town running. Balasynovych, 37, has been in local politics since her 20s and is known as a campaigner for women’s rights and the victims of domestic abuse. Now she finds herself coordinating her city’s response to a Russian assault. There have been surprises about who turned out to be the most resilient among her team of local administrators, now cast in the role of military organisers and local defenders. “My secretary is 19 years old and she is here almost 24 hours a day. She isn’t scared of bombs and she’s completely fearless; I wouldn’t have guessed it,” Balasynovych said. Her economic adviser, Andriy Melnyk, has become the commander of the city’s “territorial defence forces”. Weapons have been handed out to all who want them, something she concedes will probably fuel a domestic violence catastrophe in future. “But for now, victory is more important,” she said.\nOn the third night of the Russian assault, Vasylkiv was again hit with missiles. The target this time was a fuel storage facility which exploded, causing a huge boom to rumble through the town. Smoke was still rising from the location on Monday afternoon. Also hit was a technical college on the main street, blowing a huge crater in the centre of the building, and tossing pipes and debris over a wide area. Balasynovych at the time was in a cellar with 70 other people. The walls began shaking and everyone inside was terrified. “I called the priest from the local monastery and put him on video call and we all prayed together. I thought it was the last moment of my life,” she recalled.\nAmid the attacks, work has begun in earnest to keep the town fed, as food and fuel shortages threaten to make life even harder for the millions of Ukrainians sheltering from Putin’s aggression. On Monday, after a 39-hour weekend curfew, residents emerged to stock up on supplies, and there were long queues at pharmacies and supermarkets. Other shops remain closed. Amid widespread confusion and deliberate disinformation strategies, it has been hard to pin down details of exactly what has happened in many places across Ukraine in the past few days, and Vasylkiv is no exception. Ukrainian authorities have claimed that two Ilyushin transport planes, from which the Russians were trying to land troops and hardware at Vasylkiv, were shot out of the sky over the weekend, and that Russian troops launched an assault on the airbase and were repelled. Balasynovych confirmed this account, and Melnyk said he had been involved in shooting battles with Russian soldiers who had been landed. Balasynovych said there were “about 10” casualties on the Ukrainian side and 28 people still in hospital. But no convincing public evidence has surfaced about the two downed planes, or about a drop of paratroopers in Vasylkiv. “So far, there has not been evidence of a Russian airborne assault on Vasylkiv, though Russian forces may have sent a ground force detachment there early on from the north,” said Michael Kofman, a military analyst who has been closely tracking the Russian assault. Also difficult to verify were Balasynovych’s claims about a large network of Russian agents, living in local towns and villages, many of whom had spent months blending into local communities, won over people’s trust and had been carefully identifying targets and making measurements to pass back to their bosses in Moscow. When asked for evidence or further information about their arrests, she cited military secrecy.\nThere is certainly no doubt about the missile attacks on Vasylkiv – on Monday afternoon shocked students walked through the destroyed remains of their former technical college, presumably hit by a missile aimed at the military college across the street. Sights like these have helped to consolidate the mood that has been gradually maturing over the last eight years in towns like Vasylkiv, which were never previously known as hotbeds of Ukrainian nationalism. “Every second person here has family links to Russia,” said Balasynovych. Men came from all over the Soviet Union to study at Vasylkiv’s aviation academy, including Balasynovych’s grandfather, who grew up in Russia, met a local woman at a military ball and settled in Vasylkiv. Even now, part of her family lives in Belarus, and her cousin is a paratrooper in the Belarusian army. With Belarus edging closer to full participation in Putin’s war, she now faces the prospect that her own cousin could be fighting to take over her town.\nAs she spoke of these painful splits, a call came in: a Russian sabotage group had been apprehended at a checkpoint just outside the town. Some had been shot dead, but one was alive and still talking. “I want to look him in the eye, and talk to him,” she said. She pulled on a flak jacket – the first time she had ever worn one, she said – and summoned a large van with blacked-out windows. The van was bought with an international grant and in normal times was used to transport victims of domestic violence from locations across Ukraine to a shelter. Now she uses it to traverse the town, usually accompanied by armed men. On the way to meet the captured Russian, she drove past a checkpoint where a man was giving lessons in how to make molotov cocktails, the symbol of this new Ukrainian resistance. Volodymyr Kravets, an 83-year-old veteran of the Soviet missile forces, was at the checkpoint to request a few molotov cocktails to throw from his house, just down the road from the checkpoint. Kravets did his military service in the Russian far north in 1959, and used to have warm feelings for the country, but said he was now disgusted with Putin’s Russia and wanted to fight his invading army. “I tried to buy a gun but they told me I was too old. I at least want one of these to throw at the fuckers,” he said with a cackle symbolic of just how much Putin’s actions have damaged affection for Russia even in the older generation. In the end, the van was turned back before the scene of the shootout. At the last minute, the national guard sealed off the checkpoint. The story of the Russian sabotage group was another claim that could not be verified. Balasynovych said that while it was important Ukraine did not capitulate, she hoped negotiations with Russia might bring some kind of compromise to avoid the trauma that would come from an extended war. “People used to think about new car or iPhone, but nobody was thinking about peace. Now, we are dreaming of it. When old people used to wish each other peace, we didn’t understand what they meant. Now we do.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-28T22:09:47Z'}, {'id': '621caa0a8f0881b4f17077c1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have launched rocket attacks that killed “dozens” of civilians in Ukraine’s second city, and began a renewed assault on the capital Kyiv, as Moscow faced unprecedented western sanctions and isolation. Widespread use of indiscriminate weapons such as multiple rocket launchers against civilian areas, as used on Monday in the city of Kharkiv, suggested that the Kremlin, having failed to land a knockout blow in the first days of the war, was prepared to unleash more desperate methods. The prosecutor of the international criminal court said he would launch an investigation into possible war crimes or crimes against humanity in Ukraine.\nLate on Monday, the Ukrainian ambassador to the US accused Russian forces of using a thermobaric weapons, which use oxygen from the surrounding air to generate a high-temperature explosion. “The devastation that Russia is trying to inflict on Ukraine is large,” said Oksana Markarova. Satellite photos showed long Russian columns heading towards Kyiv. The satellite imaging company Maxar published a picture of a 40-mile convoy of forces about 30 miles from the capital. Inside Kyiv, air raid sirens sounded as evening fell and several detonations were reported. Blasts were also heard in Mariupol on the coast of the Sea of Azov. However, Russian forces have yet to take any major Ukrainian city. Turkey said it would ban all warships from crossing the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits leading to the Black Sea, blocking the route for at least four Russian vessels which are waiting to cross from the Mediterranean.\nThe Élysée Palace said after a call between Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin that the Russian president had said he was “willing to commit” to ending attacks on civilians and civil infrastructure while ceasefire talks were taking place between Russian and Ukrainian officials in Belarus. But on the fifth day of fighting and with Russian forces advancing more slowly than many analysts had expected, the Ukrainian interior ministry adviser Anton Herashchenko said on Monday Kharkiv had been “massively fired on”, leaving “dozens of dead and hundreds of wounded”. After a classified briefing from US intelligence in Washington, Senator Chris Murphy said on Twitter: “The ability to keep supply lines running to Ukraine remains alive, but Russia will try to encircle and cut off Kiev in the next several weeks. The fight for Kiev will be long and bloody and Ukrainians are rapidly preparing for street to street combat.”\nThe talks between Russian and Ukrainian delegations near the Belarus-Ukraine border ended inconclusively, with national news agencies quoting officials as saying the negotiators would return to their respective capitals for consultations before embarking on a second round of talks in the coming days. The Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak described negotiations as “difficult” and said: “Unfortunately, the Russian side is still extremely biased regarding the destructive processes it launched.” The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, urged Russian troops to abandon their equipment and leave the battlefield to save their lives, claiming 4,500 were already dead. Russia’s nuclear forces were placed on high alert, it was announced on Monday, in line with Putin’s orders to his defence chiefs the day before, but it was unclear if the alert involved the movement of the country’s nuclear weapons, or the deployment of personnel to command and control facilities. Meanwhile Russia’s foreign ministry said on Monday that those supplying lethal weapons to Ukraine would bear responsibility should they be used during the war.\nA senior US intelligence official said the president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, who has backed Putin’s military assault on Ukraine after earlier playing an intermediary role, could also send troops to help Russia in the next 24 hours. Western analysts also said they were alarmed by a referendum vote in pro-Russian Belarus that could result in nuclear weapons being stationed on the country’s soil for the first time since the fall of the Soviet Union. Terrified Ukrainian families huddled in shelters, basements or corridors, with millions thought to have fled their homes and more than 500,000 having left Ukraine to escape the invasion.\nRussia’s defence ministry said its forces had taken control of the towns of Berdyansk and Enerhodar in Ukraine’s south-eastern Zaporizhzhia region, as well as the area around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) said it had information that “Russian forces were operational near the site but had not entered it at the time of reporting”. The IAEA’s director general, Rafael Grossi, “stressed that any military or other action that could threaten the plant’s safety or security must be avoided”. At least 102 civilians in Ukraine have been killed, with 304 more wounded, but the real figure will be “considerably higher”, the UN human rights commissioner, Michelle Bachelet, said earlier on Monday. A US defence official said Russia had fired more than 350 missiles. Karim Khan, the ICC prosecutor, said he would open an investigation into possible war crimes or crimes against humanity in Ukraine, based both on a prior report by his predecessor in 2020, and on current military operations. Khan said he had already instructed his team to take steps to preserve evidence. Western officials said there would be “a requirement to record and capture” attacks on civilians to establish whether war crimes had been committed by the unnecessary targeting of civilians by Russian forces. At least seven were reported to have died after what appeared to be indiscriminate rocket strikes on Kharkiv on Monday, although an Ukrainian official said “dozens” had been killed.\n“I think we will be very attentive and alert to war crimes or breaches of international humanitarian law in this conflict,” said one official, although they said it was too soon comment whether they thought the attack on Kharkiv was a breach, or whether they believed cluster munitions that are banned by the UK and many other European nations but not Russia or the US had been used. On Monday, the UN general assembly began an emergency session to address the Russian invasion. Ukraine’s allies are hoping to get the support of more than 100 countries to support a resolution condemning Russia, in an attempt to press home Moscow’s isolation. While the assembly was underway, the US mission to the UN announced it was expelling 12 Russian diplomats for allegedly “engaging in espionage activities” which threatened national security. Russia’s ambassador to UN, Vassily Nebenzya, said the the diplomats had been told to leave by 7 March; He called it “another hostile” measure against the Russian mission. The Kremlin conceded on Monday that Russia’s economic reality had changed, but said there was no reason to doubt its central bank, which raised interest rates to 20% as it sought to shield the economy from tough new western sanctions.\nPanicked Russians withdrew savings and sought to exchange roubles for dollars and euros, while Russian businesses scrambled to protect their finances as the rouble lost nearly 30% of its value against the dollar on Monday. Measures adopted by the US, the UK, EU member states and other countries have blocked some Russian banks from the Swift international payments system and severely restricted the Russian central bank’s ability to access its $640bn (£477bn) of reserves.\nIn a further crippling blow, the US on Monday imposed swingeing new sanctions, in effect blocking Americans from engaging in any transactions involving Russia’s central bank, finance ministry or national wealth fund. “The economic reality has considerably changed,” said the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov. “These are heavy sanctions, they are problematic, but Russia has the potential to offset the harm. Russia has been making plans for quite a long time.” The EU has also shut all Russian planes out of its airspace, forcing the Russian airline Aeroflot to cancel all flights to European destinations until further notice. The Russian state media outlets RT and Sputnik have also been banned in the EU. Switzerland on Monday set aside its tradition of neutrality and said it would adopt all sanctions already imposed on Russia by the EU. “This is a big step for Switzerland,” said the country’s president, Ignazio Cassis. On Monday, Shell announced it would follow BP in divesting from its joint ventures in Russia, withdrawing from projects with the Russian gas corporation, Gazprom. In addition to sanctions, the US and several EU countries have announced they will send Stinger missiles and other military supplies to Ukraine. Germany has said it will increase defence spending massively, casting off decades of reluctance, while in a similarly radical change of policy Finland said it would send weapons and ammunition to Ukraine, the prime minister, Sanna Marin, said. For the first time in its history, the EU signed off on an agreement to finance the purchase and delivery of weapons to a country under attack, providing €500m (£420m) of military equipment to the Ukrainian armed forces in a move described as a “watershed moment”. Nato partners are also providing Ukraine with air-defence missiles and anti-tank weapons, the alliance’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, tweeted on Monday.\nPeskov doubled down on Monday on the Kremlin’s logic for sending Russian forces into Ukraine, saying western arms supplies showed that Moscow was right to try to demilitarise its neighbour and accusing the EU of hostile behaviour. Russia’s growing diplomatic isolation continued, with the UN human rights council agreeing on Monday to Ukraine’s request to hold an urgent debate on the invasion. Zelenskiy on Monday also formally signed an official request for Ukraine to join the EU. The bloc said it was is expecting Ukraine’s application “imminently”, which officials in Brussels said “would need to be assessed very rapidly by the council, and a decision made as to whether to request an urgent opinion from the Commission”. Western officials believe Putin wants to overthrow Ukraine’s government and replace it with a puppet regime. His instructions on Sunday for Russian nuclear readiness raised fears that the invasion could lead to nuclear war by design or mistake. • This article was amended on 1 March 2022 to remove a reference to the war in Ukraine being the biggest invasion of a European country since the second world war, in consideration of the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-01T13:04:53Z'}, {'id': '621d03708f081a8f5f3e2264', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain has long been a haven for people of negotiable integrity to stash their cash, often via property deals made with the help of an army of lawyers, PR advisers and bankers. Not only are super-mansions in London and the home counties a safe bet from an investment point of view, but the ability to disguise ownership via a labyrinthine network of shell companies offers a degree of anonymity to those who prefer their financial dealings to remain secret.\nOn top of that, the Companies House database – the repository for details of UK-registered businesses – has become almost a punchline to a pretty bad joke. Information is often missing, incomplete or obviously fake. Directors have been registered in the name of Adolf Tooth Fairy Hitler and Judas Superadio Iskariot, without anyone batting an eyelid. Information can be hard to search for and the website crashes or times out on a regular basis. On Monday, amid pressure to crack down on the billions of pounds in Russian “dirty money” flowing through London, the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, brought forward measures designed to clean up the mess. They include a register of properties owned by overseas investors, in theory preventing them from disguising their identities. “By legislating now, we’ll send a clear warning to those who have or are thinking about using the UK property market to launder ill-gotten gains,” Kwarteng said. Companies House will also be “upgraded” to improve the quality of information available from its database and there will be measures to strengthen “unexplained wealth orders”, which give law enforcement bodies the power to seize assets where they suspect criminality may have occurred. Long-time anti-corruption campaigners are relieved, if frustrated at how long it has taken Britain to relinquish its role as obsequious financial butler to what the business department now calls “corrupt elites”. “It’s about bloody time,” said Susan Hawley, executive director of Spotlight on Corruption. She said campaigners had “been waiting six years” for measures like these, ever since an anti-corruption summit in 2016, adding: “These measures are a good start but on their own will not be enough to plug the loopholes in our defences against dirty money. “We need a massive investment in law enforcement capability so they can get on with investigating unexplained wealth, and with investigating and prosecuting money-laundering breaches and sanctions evasion.” Already, there is scepticism about whether the super-rich and super-nefarious will be able to flout the rules. For instance, while the “ultimate beneficial owner” of a property will have to be disclosed, that could still be a legal entity or a company. If that entity is itself in a jurisdiction that permits corporate secrecy, there will be no way to unravel the final links in the chain to the person at the very top. Graham Barrow, of the Dark Money Files podcast, has consistently exposed some of the more ludicrous failings of Companies House to provide legitimate data. He pointed out that these rules are similar to those for “persons of significant control” disclosures that, in theory, tell you who owns a company. “We know from experience that they can be circumvented by declaring that there is no one who meets the definition of a ‘beneficial owner’,” he said. “Whilst there are penalties for making a false declaration, knowing who is behind an entity in a location like the Marshall Islands, the Seychelles or BVI [British Virgin Islands] is not a straightforward task. “Without adequate human and financial resources, along with cooperation from overseas territories, the requirements look difficult to enforce effectively.” Hawley raised misgivings about measures to target those trying to evade sanctions, a hot-button topic as ministers target Russian oligarchs and Kremlin officials. “It isn’t clear that this bill goes far enough in giving law enforcement the real tools to bring criminal cases for sanction evasion,” she said. “There hasn’t been a criminal sanctions evasion case for over 12 years.”\nBarrow also declared it “deeply disappointing” that the government was not acting faster. “Companies House continues to be abused on a daily basis and further delay simply opens the door to more and more criminals.” One campaigner, who asked not to be named until he had spent more time analysing the detail, was more sanguine about the prospect of the financial chicanery that may go on as the corrupt and secretive hide their assets elsewhere in the period between the proposals being announced and implemented. “The gate will be open for a while,” he said. “But I’d rather get a decent piece of legislation than try to pass it in three hours. We can’t turn back the clock. We are where we are.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-28T21:09:02Z'}, {'id': '621cf59b8f08ab197f3f9c00', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Since the outbreak of fighting last week and after years of reluctance, western countries have promised to send thousands of anti-tank and hundreds of anti-aircraft weapons to Ukraine, but they will have to get supplies to the frontline quickly if they are to be effective. Germany in the past few days broke with decades of anti-rearmament tradition to send 1,000 anti-tank weapons and 500 Stinger anti-aircraft missile systems, while Sweden agreed to send 5,000 next generation light anti-tank weapons (NLAWs). And over the weekend it emerged that the US, for the first time, would send the portable Stingers, badly needed if Ukraine is to prevent Russia gradually gaining air superiority as it tries to close in on Kyiv. Britain and the Netherlands have also agreed to send more weapons, although in the UK’s case details are sketchy. British and other western officials were keen to avoid public discussion of supply lines, although Boris Johnson was pictured at RAF Brize Norton on Saturday in front of a military plane sending humanitarian and “military supplies” to Ukraine. With Ukraine’s airspace closed to Nato planes, experts believe western supplies are being dropped off in Poland before crossing the border by land. For now, routes to key Ukrainian cities remain open, but it is not clear for how long. Nick Reynolds, a land warfare analyst with Rusi, said “the failure of the offensive against Irpin on Sunday leaves two major highways connecting Kyiv and Poland still under Ukrainian control. Likewise, Russian forces do not seem to have been able to encircle Kharkiv, so supply lines there should remain open for now.”\nThat may explain why Russia has been so keen to try to take control of the north-west of Kyiv, starting with the helicopter deployment of special forces on the Hostomel airport on Thursday. But even if that were to change, other less direct routes to the capital from the south remain open. Ukraine’s armed forces have historically been largely reliant on equipment originally made in Russia or before that the Soviet Union, but this has gradually been augmented by western weaponry over the past three years that is now deemed critical to halt the Russian tank-dominated advance. Barack Obama was reluctant to provide Ukraine with any defensive weaponry after Russia’s seizure of Crimea in 2014 when he was president, fearing it could be escalatory, although the US did supply body armour and night vision goggles. The US first supplied $47m (£35m) worth of sophisticated Javelin anti-tank missiles, with a range of 2.5km (1.5 miles), in 2018, although they were not at first delivered to the frontline of the conflict that was ongoing at the time in the Donbas. But the US record of arms supply has been uneven to say the least. In 2019, Donald Trump appeared to threaten to halt further supplies unless Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, provided information about the business dealings in the country of Joe Biden’s son Hunter. The then US president was forced to relent after a leak of the demand became public – an issue that led to his impeachment in the House, although the Senate acquitted him. Other nations have only followed this year, including the UK in January, which sent 2,000 simpler NLAW anti-tank weapons, and Lithuania also sent some Stingers. Experts believed that Ukraine would have about 10 days worth of military supplies, making the need to resupply at all levels pressing. It is hard to get definitive evidence of the use of western equipment in action, although a reliable report from the eastern city of Kharkiv, suggested that NLAWs had helped stop an advance of Russian armour on Thursday, the first day of fighting. “How do you say in English ‘God save the Queen?’” a Ukrainian soldier told the Daily Telegraph. Videos are circulating on social media of a strike on a stationary Russian tank. Ukraine has so far claimed it has shot down 29 Russian planes and 29 helicopters, and taken out 191 tanks. These figures cannot be verified, but there is enough evidence of combat damage to suggest modern western weaponry is helping the defence of the country. Maintaining the supply of western arms is therefore likely to be crucial to the defence of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-28T20:05:00Z'}, {'id': '621d09b78f08a5262b54383c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Shell is to exit its joint ventures with Russian state energy firm Gazprom, a day after BP said it would offload its 20% stake in Kremlin-owned oil firm Rosneft, as British businesses scrambled to distance themselves from Vladimir Putin. The oil company said it would “exit its joint ventures with Gazprom and related entities”, which are worth about $3bn. The planned sales include its 27.5% stake in the Sakhalin-II liquefied natural gas facility, its 50% stake in the Salym Petroleum Development and the Gydan energy venture. Shell will also end its involvement in the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project, in which it holds a 10% stake worth $1bn. Germany, which was due to double its Russian gas imports via the pipeline, had recently called a halt to the project in the light of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. “We are shocked by the loss of life in Ukraine, which we deplore, resulting from a senseless act of military aggression which threatens European security,” said Shell’s chief executive, Ben van Beurden. The company said its staff in Ukraine and other countries have been working together to manage the company’s response to the crisis locally. It will also work with aid partners and humanitarian agencies to help in the relief effort. “Our decision to exit is one we take with conviction,” said Van Beurden. Shell will still have a network of petrol stations in the country. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, who spoke to the Shell chief earlier on Monday, said the company had made the “right call”. “There is now a strong moral imperative on British companies to isolate Russia. This invasion must be a strategic failure for Putin.” Asked whether the government had applied pressure on Shell and BP to exit Russia, one Whitehall source said ministers had been pushing at an open door, with the companies keen to disassociate themselves from Putin’s Kremlin. “We cannot – and we will not – stand by,” said Van Beurden. “Our immediate focus is the safety of our people in Ukraine and supporting our people in Russia. “In discussion with governments around the world, we will also work through the detailed business implications, including the importance of secure energy supplies to Europe and other markets, in compliance with relevant sanctions.” At the end of 2021, Shell had around $3bn in non-current assets in its Russian ventures. “We expect that the decision to start the process of exiting joint ventures with Gazprom and related entities will impact the book value of Shell’s Russia assets and lead to impairments,” the company said. This could indicate that the cost of exiting its Russian joint venture will exceed $3bn, given the costs Shell may incur in physically extricating itself from the vast, technically challenging Sakhalin-2 project, which requires expert personnel and highly specialised equipment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-28T19:08:02Z'}, {'id': '621d05678f085063fc85668e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kremlin-backed television station RT could lose its licence to broadcast in the UK after media regulator Ofcom launched 15 separate investigations into its news coverage of the war in Ukraine. The English-language channel, once known as Russia Today and fronted by several British presenters and journalists, has repeatedly echoed President Putin’s narrative of the invasion. It has consistently referred to the invasion as a “special military operation” and focused on how Russia is supposedly protecting breakaway regions from Ukrainian aggression.\nBritish broadcasting rules allows politically biased coverage providing the output still meets the standards of ‘due impartiality’ – meaning viewers are still exposed to alternative viewpoints. The unprecedented scale of the investigation into RT, which relates to 15 editions of the channel’s hourly news headlines programme broadcast on Sunday, suggests Ofcom has grounds to believe RT has consistently failed to meet this standard in relation to coverage of the war in Ukraine. Ofcom chief executive Dame Melanie Dawes said the investigations would be concluded urgently: “When reporting on an armed conflict, we recognise it can be difficult for broadcasters to verify information and events, but it is imperative that they make every effort to do so. They must also explain clearly to audiences where there is uncertainty or where events are disputed.” The decision follows the EU’s move to block Russian-backed media channels – including RT – over the weekend, although details of how that will be enforced remain unclear. The BBC fears its own operations and broadcasts in Russia could be severely restricted if Ofcom chooses to remove RT’s licence in the UK. Although Ofcom is operationally independent from the government, its leadership is appointed by ministers and it has come under substantial political pressure from both the Conservatives and Labour to investigate RT. On Sunday, prime minister Boris Johnson strongly criticised the channel: “The stuff that RT is peddling at the moment is doing a lot of damage to the truth, and I think it’s important that Ofcom should look at it and make up its mind about whether that organisation is infringing the rules of this country”. He said that while he might like to order it to be banned, “the difference between us and Russia is that the power is not with me, and that’s the right thing.” Ofcom very rarely removes licences from television broadcasters. When RT was found to have made multiple breaches of the broadcasting code over its coverage of the Salisbury poisoning and the Syrian war, it was fined £200,000 – although it has yet to pay up. RT’s online operation, which enjoys a substantial reach, would not be affected by any Ofcom ban. Only the television channel – which broadcasts on Freeview but has had historically low ratings – could be forced off air by the media regulator. On Friday, Ofcom executive Kevin Bakhurst told the Guardian that his regulator needed to respect free speech and would take into the account the potential impact on British outlets of any ban. He said: “We’d be mad not to think of the wider implications, not just for BBC journalists based in Russia but for Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-28T18:41:01Z'}]}