{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': ' Saudi Arabia is choosing friends on its own terms and Biden is not one of them', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-12T17:29:04Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/12/in-the-new-world-order-saudi-arabia-is-choosing-its-friends-on-its-own-terms-and-joe-biden-is-not-one-of-them', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Mohammed bin Salman', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohammed-bin-salman'}, {'tagTitle': 'Saudi Arabia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Joe Biden', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden'}, {'tagTitle': 'Oil', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil'}, {'tagTitle': 'Commodities', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/commodities'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Xi Jinping', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping'}, {'tagTitle': 'United Arab Emirates', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates'}, {'tagTitle': 'Opec', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/opec'}, {'tagTitle': 'US foreign policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Chulov', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-chulov'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 21, 'elements': [{'id': '6346bb3d8f08253e9d659c10', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Paris’s art curators met to discuss staging a major retrospective of Ukrainian photographer Boris Mikhailov’s work, none could have guessed how prescient and tragic its eventual timing would turn out to be – or how his depictions of the poverty of the Soviet Union and the grim hardship of its aftermath would take on new meaning following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the razing of his home town, Kharkiv, which features in so many of his photographs.\nMikhailov’s blue-tinted series of 111 pictures taken in newly independent Ukraine’s second largest city after the collapse of the USSR in 1991, titled At Dusk, are bleak. There is little evidence of the much-vaunted grandeur of the Soviet Union as proudly declaimed by various leaders in Moscow. The system had changed, but the penury and hardship of people’s lives had not, as shown by the stark images of men, women and children captured in the detritus of a desolate urban landscape. Kharkiv briefly emerged from this to become a thriving, cosmopolitan metropolis, though Mikhailov’s photos from the first decade of the 21st century show independence and capitalism had brought colourful advertisements and billboards, but also an ocean of cheap plastic goods and plastic bags. Then Russia invaded Ukraine in February this year. “I would say it is almost certain that most if not all of the buildings and places in the photographs no longer exist,” says Laurie Hurwitz, curator of a major retrospective of Mikhailov’s work at the Maison Européenne de la Photographie (MEP) in Paris. “It brings a tear to the eye to know that they have been bombed and destroyed. “It’s difficult to believe what Mikhailov lived through before. This exhibition is hard and beautiful and still gives me the shivers even thought I walk through it every day.” One photograph called The Theatre of War, Second Act, Time Out, taken in 2013, shows a scene from Kyiv’s Maidan square as Ukrainian protesters pitched their tents.\n“Boris is very relevant now in every way … He won’t say what he thinks of Putin. He doesn’t talk about what is going on now in Kharkiv but it clearly affects him. The roots of the war can been seen in his work,” Hurwitz said. Born in 1938 in Kharkiv, Mikhailov trained as an engineer and taught himself photography; his early work was radical and subversive. He was a member of the dissident collective Vremya, which later became the Kharkiv School of Photography, which profited from a slight liberalisation of life known as “Khruschev’s thaw” – after the then Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev who succeeded Joseph Stalin – to reject the ideology of “Soviet realism”.\nEarly in his engineering career, Mikhailov was given a camera and instructed to document work at the state-owned factory where he was employed. He used it to take nude photographs of his wife, Vita. He developed them secretly in the factory’s laboratory but was fired after they were discovered by the Soviet authorities. Afterwards he eked out a living as a commercial photographer and would later use copies of photos people sent to him to be enlarged or improved to create works of art, using kitsch colours. In one, his own passport photo, Mikhailov is shown in his green serge Soviet military uniform; he has decorated the jacket with Ukrainian embroidery and painted his lips red. The Salt Lake series of 1986, sepia-coloured photographs taken secretly, show Soviets enjoying their “freedom” at a popular bathing spot in the Donbas region of southern Ukraine. The bathers believed the warm salty water had curative properties; in fact it was a heavily polluted and poisoned industrial site surrounded by factories.\nThe Red series, taken between 1965 and 1978, consists of 84 colour photographs taken in Kharkiv containing the colour red, a symbol of the revolution and Soviet empire. At Dusk is a series of panoramic photographs of Kharkiv in the north-east of Ukraine, tinted in blue, a colour that Mikhailov said reminded him of the second world war: “Blue for me is the colour of the blockade, hunger and war.” The exhibition also features a number of photographs of Mikhailov, his wife, and others posing nude, which led to the Soviet authorities describing his work as “pornographic”.\nHe was regularly tailed by KGB agents, his camera leading to suspicions that he was a western spy. Before the Covid pandemic, Mikhailov divided his time between Kharkiv and Berlin, where he now lives permanently. He has represented Ukraine at the Venice Biennale in 2007 and 2017, been exhibited at the Tate Modern, MoMA in New York, in Germany and in Kyiv. The MEP exhibition, postponed from 2020 because of Covid, features 800 Mikhailov works – the catalogue is 2 inches thick – including projected images spanning six decades from the 1960s to 2019. A short walk across Paris, Mikhailov is also being celebrated at Paris’s Bourse de Commerce, where the Pinault Collection is featuring a display of At Dusk photographs as a supporting act to a Albanian contemporary artist Anri Sala, whose 2011 short film, 1395 Days without Red, throws the spotlight on another war, the conflict in Bosnia and the long siege of Sarajevo. Simon Baker, MEP director and a former curator at the Tate Modern, writes: “Mikhailov remains one of the greatest and most celebrated photographic artists of his generation … working equally between documentary, performative and conceptual practices. Mikhailov’s ‘diaries’ of life in Ukraine both before and after the fall of the Soviet regime remind us of the rich history and endless resilience of the Ukrainian people.” • Boris Mikhailov: Ukrainian Diary is at the Maison Européenne de la Photographie until 15 January 2023. At Dusk is at the Bourse de Commerce until 15 January 2023.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T14:26:06Z'}, {'id': '634752cf8f08253e9d65a2d4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations general assembly has overwhelmingly condemned Russia’s “attempted illegal annexation” of four Ukrainian regions, demanding that Moscow reverse course. US president Joe Biden said the vote sent a “clear message” to Moscow. “The stakes of this conflict are clear to all, and the world has sent a clear message in response – Russia cannot erase a sovereign state from the map,” he said in a statement. “Russia cannot change borders by force. Russia cannot seize another country’s territory as its own,” Biden said. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he was “grateful to 143 states that supported the historic UNGA [United Nations general assembly] resolution”, tweeting: “The world had its say – [Russia’s] attempt at annexation is worthless and will never be recognised by free nations.” Three-quarters of the 193-member general assembly – or 143 countries – voted on Wednesday in favour of a resolution that called Moscow’s move illegal, deepening Russia’s international isolation. Only four countries joined Russia in voting against the resolution – Syria, Nicaragua, North Korea and Belarus. Thirty-five countries abstained, including Russia’s strategic partner China, together with India, South Africa and Pakistan. The rest did not vote.\nUkraine’s UN ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, said the vote result was “amazing”. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said the vote showed international unity against Russia and repeated that Washington would never recognise the “sham” referendums. The vote “is a powerful reminder that the overwhelming majority of nations stand with Ukraine, in defence of the UN Charter and in resolute opposition to Russia’s ongoing war against Ukraine and its people,” he said in a statement. Before the vote, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the UN, said: “Today it is Russia invading Ukraine. But tomorrow it could be another nation whose territory is violated. It could be you. You could be next. What would you expect from this chamber?” In September, Moscow proclaimed its annexation of four partially occupied regions in Ukraine – Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia – after staging so-called referendums. Ukraine and allies have denounced the votes as illegal and coercive. The resolution adopted on Wednesday declares that Moscow’s actions violate Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, are “inconsistent” with the principles of the UN charter, and “have no validity under international law and do not form the basis for any alteration of the status of these regions of Ukraine.” It demands that Russia “immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw all of its military forces from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders.” It also supports “the de-escalation of the current situation and a peaceful resolution of the conflict through political dialogue, negotiation, mediation and other peaceful means” that respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and internationally recognised borders. The general assembly vote followed a veto by Russia last month of a similar resolution in the 15-member security council. Russia’s UN ambassador, Vassily Nebenzia, told the general assembly ahead of the vote that the resolution was “politicised and openly provocative”, adding that it “could destroy any and all efforts in favour of a diplomatic solution to the crisis”. He also reiterated Russia’s discredited claims the referendums were valid, saying “the populations of these regions do not want to return to Ukraine”. China abstained on Wednesday because it did not believe the resolution would be helpful, China’s deputy UN ambassador Geng Shuang said. “Any action taken by the general assembly should be conducive to the de-escalation of the situation, to be conducive to the early resumption of dialogue and should be conducive to the promotion of a political solution to this crisis,” he said. Meanwhile, Democratic Republic of Congo UN ambassador Georges Nzongola-Ntalaja deplored the “double standards” of the west. “We support Ukraine. We want to see the war ended,” he said. “But we would like to see the international community take similar action against other situations in the world where countries are being invaded and occupied.” Russian president Vladimir Putin is set to meet his Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdoğan on the sidelines of a regional summit in Kazakhstan on Thursday. Kremlin aide Yuri Ushakov told reporters on Wednesday the Turkish president may propose ideas for peace, adding “a very interesting and, I hope, useful discussion awaits us”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-13T02:20:47Z'}, {'id': '63474ade8f08253e9d65a2a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former New Zealand prime minister Sir John Key has suggested he would have voted for Donald Trump in the 2016 US election, and far-right president Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil’s 2022 elections, had he been eligible to do so. Key, who served three terms as prime minister from 2008 to 2016, revealed his preferences in a quick-fire round of 20 questions that featured at the end of a new online series called Both Sides Now, hosted by members of the Labour and National youth wings. The show travels around New Zealand to interview former and current politicians, with the goal to “break down political polarisation” and bring “both sides of key issues to the people”.\nKey is broadly considered one of the country’s most popular prime ministers, and led the National party for 10 years before announcing his retirement from politics in 2016. He is still considered an influential political figure and is regularly called upon as a high-profile voice on politics and other matters in the media. At the end of the Both Sides Now episode, the hosts ask a quick-fire round of 20 questions to find out Key’s positions on both global and domestic topics, including: whether the world should have nuclear weapons, if they believe te reo Māori (Māori language) should be compulsory in schools, and whether the nickname ‘Cindy’ for current prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, is derogatory. When asked whether he would have voted “Clinton or Trump” had he been in the US in 2016, Key replied: “Trump. But I mean, you know, I’m a right-wing voter, I’m never voting left.” He went on to add: “I’m not saying that would be the right decision but I’m just saying that’s what I would have done.” A host then asks – “what about Brazil – would you have voted for Bolsonaro this election?” Key hesitates slightly, before saying “right-wing as well … yes, I think so. But some of these people are getting pretty crazy on the right, so even I might not be wanting to vote there. “But, philosophically, I have never voted anything other than right, so I’m not going to start arguing that I’m voting left now … I don’t know whether your listeners are going to agree with that, but I’m being honest with you.” Bolsonaro, who won power in 2018 by pledging to fight corruption, has never been shy about his disdain for the democratic process or his admiration for autocrats such as Chile’s General Augusto Pinochet. He trails leftist rival Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva after the first round of Brazil’s presidential polls, having lost favour for his mishandling of the coronavirus pandemic, mocking mask wearing and vaccines in a country where 684,000 lives were lost to Covid-19. A damning congressional inquiry recommended that Bolsonaro be charged with offences including crimes against humanity and charlatanism, for promoting false treatments such as hydroxychloroquine and ivermectin.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-13T00:57:58Z'}, {'id': '634707c58f085d1d9cebab34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thousands of favela residents and activists have hit the streets of Rio to voice their support for Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the leftist frontrunner to become Brazil’s next president. Addressing a sea of supporters in one of Rio’s largest favelas, the Complexo do Alemão, Lula vowed to give his far-right rival Jair Bolsonaro “a thrashing” when South America’s biggest democracy holds the second round of its presidential election at the end of October. “We’re going to win these elections,” proclaimed the 76-year-old ex-president who fell just short of an outright victory over Bolsonaro in the first round 10 days ago. Lula, who rose from rural poverty to become Brazil’s first working-class president in 2002, said he was determined to return to power “to prove to the elites who have governed since 1500 that once again a metalworker will fix this country”.\n“The only reason I’m running for president once again is my belief that we can change things,” Lula told activists during an assembly at the headquarters of Voz das Comunidades, the favela news group that organised his rare visit. “I promise you that this country is going to change – and it’s going to change for the better.”\nResidents from more than 30 favelas had flocked to the Complexo do Alemão on Wednesday morning to champion a politician they hope can end Bolsonaro’s tumultuous four-year reign, during which Covid killed nearly 700,000 people and millions were plunged into poverty. “Lula setting foot in the favela is an act of resistance. It shows that we’re not alone – that there’s hope,” said Douglas Viana, a 30-year-old activist from another sprawling working-class community, the Complexo da Maré. “This is a historic moment for the country. We’ve never seen anything on this scale,” Viana added. Rene Silva, the founder of the Voz das Comunidades, voiced optimism that social change was around the corner under Lula, who used his two-term presidency to help millions escape poverty and enter higher education with the proceeds of a regional commodities boom. “Lula represents hope – hope of less hunger and less inequality. We’ve taken so many steps backwards during Bolsonaro’s four years in power – and it will take a long time to rebuild all of this,” said Silva, 27.\nAnielle Franco, a campaigner whose politician sister Marielle Franco was assassinated in 2018, said she hoped a Lula victory might help secure justice for her murdered sibling. “Lula symbolises the return of the humble, the poor, the black and the north-easterners from the favela to the presidency – everything that we don’t have under this government,” Franco said. Fighting a ‘government of hatred’ Lula won the election’s first round in the region around Alemão, a vast sweep of redbrick housing in north Rio with tens of thousands of residents, as well as in other major favelas such as Rocinha and Maré. But the leftist lost in Rio state as a whole, with Bolsonaro winning 51% of the vote to Lula’s 40.7%, and Lula has stepped up his campaigning here ahead of the 30 October showdown with the far-right incumbent. Carlos Lupi, a Labour party leader who is helping run Lula’s second-round campaign, said Wednesday’s event was designed to raise awareness in the favelas about the urgent need for political change. “This is the government of hatred, of anger – and we must defeat it,” Lupi said as the crowds streamed down one of Alemão’s main arteries with banners denouncing the hunger crisis blighting Brazil’s poor. “We need to wake this community up to the harm this government is causing it.” Not all locals were convinced, with many evangelical favela residents remaining loyal to Bolsonaro, whose allies have falsely accused Lula of plotting to close churches. Valmir da Silva, a 51-year-old driver, came to the Alemão rally carrying a towel featuring Bolsonaro’s image and his nationalist slogan: “Brazil above everything, God above all.”\n“He has done more in two years than Lula did in eight,” Silva said of the right-wing radical. “Lula isn’t interested in the poor. All he thinks about is staying in power.” Silva insisted the throng of Lula supporters around him didn’t represent the working-class area where he was born and raised. “The favela’s divided,” he said. But as the young favela leaders addressed Lula, they were united in their plea for better healthcare and education – and an end to the government neglect and police violence that claims hundreds of mostly black lives each year. “We are tired of dying,” local activist Alan Brum told Lula. Buba Aguiar, an activist from a community called Acari, told the former president the only way of overcoming Bolsonaro and his far-right movement was to join forces with the voices of the favela, where about 20% of Rio’s citizens live. “There’s no way that we can stop authoritarianism or stop Bolsonarismo, without the leaders who are here today,” Aguiar said. “It’s only with our help that we’ll be able to get Brazil back on track.” Additional reporting by Alan Lima', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-13T03:57:04Z'}, {'id': '6346cdf88f08253e9d659cf0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s army boasted of territorial gains near the strategically vital southern city of Kherson on Wednesday as Nato allies including the UK delivered new air defence systems in the wake of Russia’s recent missile attacks across the country. After 48 hours of Ukrainian cities coming under heavy fire, the government in Kyiv could celebrate positive news from both the frontlines and its diplomatic efforts to secure ground-to-air systems, including anti-aircraft weapons from the UK. Five settlements in the Beryslav district in the north-east of the Kherson region – Novovasylivka, Novogrygorivka, Nova Kamyanka, Tryfonivka, Chervone – were said to have been taken from Russian forces over the day. Kherson was the first city to fall to Russia following the invasion on 24 February and it is a crucial strategic and symbolic target for Ukraine’s southern counterattack. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, lauded the arrival of the first of four Iris-T defence systems from Germany and an “expedited” delivery of the sophisticated national advanced surface-to-air missile systems (Nasams) from the US. “A new era of air defence has begun in Ukraine,” Reznikov tweeted. “Iris-Ts from Germany are already here. Nasams are coming. This is only the beginning. And we need more.”\nThe UK has said it will donate cutting edge air defence weaponry, capable of shooting down cruise missiles It did not say how many of the Amraam rockets would be sent to Ukraine, but said they would be used with Nasams. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, said: “Russia’s latest indiscriminate strikes on civilian areas in Ukraine warrant further support to those seeking to defend their nation. So today I have authorised the supply of Amraam anti-aircraft missiles to Ukraine. These weapons will help Ukraine defend its skies from attacks and strengthen their overall missile defence alongside the US Nasams.”\nRussia fired more than 80 cruise missiles and 24 drones into Ukraine during the morning rush hour on Monday and continued to attack cities and critical infrastructure across the country on Tuesday. Vladimir Putin had suggested in remarks following the mass strikes that the attacks were a response to the explosions on the Kerch Bridge connecting Russia to Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula illegally annexed by the Kremlin in 2014. On Wednesday the Kremlin said eight people had been detained over the attack on the bridge. Russia’s security forces named a senior figure from Ukraine as being behind them, a claim dismissed in Kyiv as “nonsense”. Half of the drones and missiles fired into Ukraine’s cities on Monday and Tuesday were shot down but dozens hit their targets, killing 20 people and highlighting the weakness of the country’s air defence. On Wednesday, Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, conceded that the strikes had badly affected the country’s electricity network as he appealed to citizens and businesses to reduce their electricity consumption during peak hours to avoid blackouts. He called for people to reduce power consumption from 5pm to 10pm across Ukraine by 25% in order to stabilise the power system. He said: “We are grateful to all Ukrainians who deliberately reduced electricity consumption yesterday and the night before yesterday. “The total saving was 10%. We also thank the heads of regions, heads of communities, who took a responsible approach and cut power consumption in communities. “The minimum permissible indoor temperature this winter will be 16 degrees celsius, while the average temperature will be 18 degrees. This is a necessity and this is our contribution to the victory. After all, it depends on each of us how we will get through this winter.” Before a meeting of defence ministers in Brussels, the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said other Nato members were looking to provide more ground-to-air defences to protect against Russia’s “indiscriminate” attacks across the country. “We will address how to ramp up support for Ukraine and the top priority will be more air defence for Ukraine,” he said. The Dutch defence minister, Kajsa Ollongren, wrote in a letter to parliament that her government would be donating €15m (£13m) worth of air defences to Ukraine. “These attacks ... can only be met with unrelenting support for Ukraine and its people,” she wrote. Western sources suggested, however, that there was a shortage of equipment among allies to offer to Ukraine. The continued progress of Ukrainian forces in the Kherson region is nevertheless a major boost, although the government said the Russians were continuing to hammer the southern frontlines hard. A senior Nato official claimed that Russia had depleted a significant proportion of its precision-guided ammunition in its invasion and that its industry could not produce a number of key types of ammunition and weapon systems due to western sanctions. The official, quoted by Reuters, said he did not know how long it would take for Russia to mobilise the 300,000 troops Moscow is aiming for, and suggested it could take a few months. Kherson, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia and Luhansk are four regions that Putin recently announced to some fanfare had been annexed by Russia, a move condemned as illegal under international law. The fighting in those regions continues, however. At least seven people were killed and eight injured in a Russian strike on a crowded market in the town of Avdiivka, the governor of the eastern Donetsk region said on Wednesday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-13T10:59:02Z'}, {'id': '6346fe588f08530b6de775b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Within a decade, the US will need to deter two major nuclear weapons powers for the first time, the Biden administration has warned, pointing to the Russian arsenal that is increasingly being brandished by Moscow and an expanding Chinese stockpile. The president’s new national security strategy (NSS) depicts China as the most capable long-term competitor, but Russia as the more immediate, disruptive threat, pointing to its nuclear posturing over Ukraine. It warns that threat could grow as Russian forces continue to suffer defeats on the battlefield. “Russia’s conventional military will have been weakened, which will likely increase Moscow’s reliance on nuclear weapons in its military planning,” the strategy blueprint says. Its publication was scheduled in the spring but was postponed because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Vladimir Putin has threatened to use “all means” to defend Russian territory, in which he included Crimea, annexed in 2014, and four Ukrainian regions he now claims. The NSS pledges US support for Ukrainian resistance would not be affected by such threats.\n“The United States will not allow Russia, or any power, to achieve its objectives through using, or threatening to use, nuclear weapons,” the document says. In a foreword, Biden makes a distinction between the types of threats posed by Moscow and Beijing. “Russia poses an immediate threat to the free and open international system, recklessly flouting the basic laws of the international order today, as its brutal war of aggression against Ukraine has shown,” the president writes. He describes China, on the other hand as “the only country with both the intent to reshape the international order and, increasingly, the economic, diplomatic, military and technological power to advance that objective”. The policy document portrays Beijing as “America’s most consequential geopolitical challenge”. “The People’s Republic of China harbors the intention and, increasingly, the capacity to reshape the international order in favor of one that tilts the global playing field to its benefit, even as the United States remains committed to managing the competition between our countries responsibly,” it says. China has an estimated 350 nuclear warheads, according to an assessment by the Federation of American Scientists, compared with 5,977 in Russia’s stockpile, against the US inventory of 5,428. However, the Pentagon believes the Chinese force will grow to more than 1,000 warheads by 2030, making it a third major nuclear power. Under the last remaining major arms control agreement in place, the New Start treaty, the US and Russia observe a ceiling of 1,550 deployed strategic warheads, referring to those warheads mounted on land or sea-launched missiles, or ready for loading on to long-range bombers. Daryl Kimball, the head of the Arms Control Association, expressed concern over whether the new language in the strategy document could herald a rethink about the size of the US arsenal. “If we have to worry about two near-peer nuclear rivals by the year 2030, what does that mean for the number of targets in Russia and China that the president believes we need to hold at risk to deter those nuclear threats? And how does that affect that total number of strategic nuclear weapons the United States and the president believes he needs to deploy?” Kimball asked. “They’re basically looking at issues and questions that could lead to a larger number calculation,” he said, adding: “It’s not hard science. It could be more; it could be less. I would argue that even if China has twice the number of nuclear weapons, we still can and should reduce the total number of strategic nuclear weapons because what we have is excessive of any reasonable calculation of what it takes to deter a nuclear attack.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-13T07:55:57Z'}, {'id': '63439a488f088272fbb9eefe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After a short and sharp 10-day campaign, voters in Vanuatu will on Thursday cast their ballots in a snap election to determine its 52-seat parliament. The Vanuatu Electoral Commission, normally staffed by just eight full-time officers, has been working around the clock to ensure the smooth running of a ballot with a record number of candidates. The Royal Australian Air Force has worked with the electoral office to deliver ballots. “It is a little bit difficult in Vanuatu,” the electoral office chairman, Edward Kaltamat, told the Guardian. “We have a lot of islands and not many roads.” Contract staff and technical support offered by Australia and New Zealand have helped swell the ranks of election workers. “In some places polling may start later in the day, and they will have to stay open longer, but we are not thinking there will be any real delay,” Kaltamat said.\nThe first ballots were sent over the weekend on a commercial flight to Noumea, alongside two officials. More than 1,000 ni-Vanuatu citizens living in New Caledonia are registered to vote. On Monday, the RAAF transported ballot papers to Malekula, Vanuatu’s second-largest island, and on to Tanna in the south. Police and local authorities were on hand to take custody. A major logistical operation was put in train to transport more ballot papers overland by vehicle and by small boats to coastal villages. Celine Bareus, 32, is contesting the election on her home island of Malekula as a first-time candidate. In the past week, long lines of men and women have formed in villages across Malekula, taking their turn to speak to her and listen to her calls for a new face for Vanuatu’s politics.\nBareus, a former public servant who runs her own technology company, knows her biggest hurdles to winning a seat are her age and her gender. In Vanuatu’s short 42-year history of independence, only five women have ever been elected to parliament. The last woman elected was in 2008. “This is the right time, the perfect time,” Barueus said. “As a young woman, I know I have to work several times harder to overcome doubt, but first and foremost I want to provide the best representation for my island, which feels very deserted and forgotten.” She hopes that she has enough local support to overcome popular views of kastom, or traditional culture, which defines men as the chiefs and is often used to exclude women.\nEight female candidates are contesting this election, including the former director general of justice and community affairs, who last year successfully challenged the government in court for wrongful termination. Doresday Kenneth Lui is running as an independent candidate but has the support of the former opposition leader and one-time foreign minister Ralph Regenvanu, who is running against her in the same electorate. They are amongst a field of 27 candidates vying for one of five seats. “We had agreed she would contest a 2024 election for us on the island of Malekula, but this snap election was unexpected and Doresday decided to run as an independent candidate in Port Vila,” he said. Regenvanu said the snap election had created a more level playing field with incumbents as unprepared as first-time candidates. For Lui, her campaign is all about leadership and the inclusion of women in decision-making at the highest levels.\n“Female voices have been absent from under the Red Roof [parliament] for far too long,” she told the Guardian at the launch of her campaign. “We need women’s voices in parliament.” The former prime minister Bob Loughman, who is from the most populous island of Tanna, called the election to stave off a vote of no confidence in his government, and will once more contest his seat. Campaigning across the board has shown widespread dissatisfaction with traditional politics where seats and ministerial appointments have been traded as alliances have shifted. Lopez Adams, a 42-year-old businessman and first-time candidate, said his decision to run was based on a simple premise: “The government is not working, no one is working, and it is affecting businesses. People are leaving to work overseas, which has a huge impact on our future.” He hoped the snap election would bring much-needed change to a nation struggling to recover not just from the impact of Covid-19, but constant battering from tropical cyclones that result in it continually having to rebuild.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T22:25:18Z'}, {'id': '6346fe458f085d1d9cebaae2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv and Moscow. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war blog today. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine’s army boasted of territorial gains near the strategically vital southern city of Kherson on Wednesday. Five settlements in the Beryslav district in the north-east of the Kherson region – Novovasylivka, Novogrygorivka, Nova Kamyanka, Tryfonivka, Chervone – were said to have been taken from Russian forces over the day. Nato allies delivered new air defence systems in the wake of Russia’s recent missile attacks across the country. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, lauded the arrival of the first of four Iris-T defence systems from Germany and an “expedited” delivery of sophisticated National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile Systems (Nasams) from the US. A Russian nuclear strike would “almost certainly” trigger a “physical response” from Ukraine’s allies and potentially from Nato, a senior NATO official has said. Any use of nuclear weapons by Moscow would have “unprecedented consequences” for Russia, the official was quoted by Reuters as saying. At least seven people were killed and eight injured in a Russian strike on a crowded market in the town of Avdiivka, the governor of Ukraine’s eastern Donetsk region said. “There is no military logic in such shelling - only an unbridled desire to kill as many of our people as possible and intimidate others,” Pavlo Kyrylenko said. President Vladimir Putin says Russia is ready to resume gas supplies via one link of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline that remains operational. The ball was in the EU’s court on whether it wanted gas supplied via the pipeline, Putin said in an address to the Russian Energy Week international forum. The head of the Russian state-owned gas monopoly supplier, Gazprom, has warned Europe of the consequences of renouncing Russian gas. There is “no guarantee” that Europe would survive winter based on its current gas storage capacity, Alexei Miller said, adding that gas in Germany’s underground storage would be enough for between two- and two-and-a-half months. Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, has appealed to citizens and businesses to reduce their electricity consumption during peak hours to avoid blackouts. People are being asked to reduce power consumption from 5pm to 10pm across Ukraine by 25% in order to stabilise the power system, which had been damaged by Russian missile attacks. External power has been restored to Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, according to the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Rafael Grossi had warned earlier that the loss of off-site power at the facility, Europe’s largest, was “deeply worrying”. Energoatom, the Ukrainian state-owned company that manages the ZNPP, has accused Russian forces occupying it of refusing a convoy of company vehicles carrying diesel to refuel the plant’s generators after shelling of a substation in the Dnipropetrovsk region caused the plant to lose power. Eight people have been detained over the weekend’s attack on the Crimea bridge, and Russia’s security forces have named a senior figure from Ukraine as being behind them. A senior Ukrainian official dismissed the investigation as “nonsense”. A crowdfunding appeal that was launched after Russian attacks on cities across the country on Monday has raised $9.6m (£8.7m) in 24 hours for the purchase of kamikaze drones for the Ukrainian armed forces. An initial 50 Ram II drones, unmanned aerial vehicles with a 3kg explosive payload, designed and built by Ukrainian companies, will be bought with the money, along with three control stations. President Putin will meet President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in what is likely to be a “very interesting” meeting in Kazakhstan tomorrow, where the Turkish leader may propose ideas for peace in Ukraine, the Kremlin has said. The Russian and Turkish presidents are expected to meet in Kazakhstan’s capital tomorrow on the sidelines of a regional summit. President Joe Biden has said he believes Vladimir Putin is a “rational actor” who badly misjudged his prospects of occupying Ukraine. The US president told CNN on Tuesday that he believed his Russian counterpart had underestimated the ferocity of Ukrainian defiance in the face of invasion, but does not believe he would resort to using a tactical nuclear weapon. Ukraine’s ministry of reintegration has confirmed that 37 Ukrainian children who were illegally deported to Russia have now returned home. The children had been deported from the Russian-occupied territory of Kharkiv region in August, it said in a statement on Facebook. The Kremlin has denied a report that Elon Musk spoke with President Vladimir Putin before publishing his “peace plan” for Ukraine that would have seen territory permanently handed over to Russia. In a mailout sent to Eurasia Group subscribers, Ian Bremmer said the Tesla CEO had told him that Putin was “prepared to negotiate”. Musk has also denied the report.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T18:00:06Z'}, {'id': '6346fad68f085d1d9cebaaaa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian nuclear strike would “almost certainly” trigger a “physical response” from Ukraine’s allies and potentially from Nato, a senior NATO official has said. Any use of nuclear weapons by Moscow would have “unprecedented consequences” for Russia, the official was quoted by Reuters as saying. It would “almost certainly be drawing a physical response from many allies, and potentially from Nato itself,” the official said. The official added that Moscow was using its nuclear threats mainly to deter the alliance and other countries from directly entering its war on Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T17:37:47Z'}, {'id': '6346f6208f08530b6de7755e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s army boasted of territorial gains near the strategically vital southern city of Kherson on Wednesday as Nato allies delivered new air defence systems in the wake of Russia’s recent missile attacks across the country. After 48 hours of Ukrainian cities coming under heavy fire, the government in Kyiv could celebrate positive news from both the frontlines and its diplomatic efforts to secure ground-to-air systems. Five settlements in the Beryslav district in the north-east of the Kherson region – Novovasylivka, Novogrygorivka, Nova Kamyanka, Tryfonivka, Chervone – were said to have been taken from Russian forces over the day. Kherson was the first city to fall to Russia following the invasion on 24 February and it is a crucial strategic and symbolic target for Ukraine’s southern counterattack. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, lauded the arrival of the first of four Iris-T defence systems from Germany and an “expedited” delivery of sophisticated National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile Systems (Nasams) from the US. “A new era of air defence has begun in Ukraine,” Reznikov tweeted. Iris-Ts from Germany are already here. Nasams are coming. This is only the beginning. And we need more.” Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T17:18:57Z'}, {'id': '6346f3a88f08253e9d659f36', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada’s defence minister, Anita Anand, has announced a new military aid package for Ukraine, which includes ammunition, communications equipment, winter clothing, armoured vehicles and artillery. Some $15m (£9.8m) in winter clothing and $15.2m (£9.9m) in howitzer ammunition make up the bulk of the latest military assistance package, Anand announced as she sat down with her Nato counterparts in Brussels. Canada also will provide another $15.3m (£10m) worth of the high-tech cameras the Ukrainians have been using on their drones, along with more satellite communication services.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T17:20:08Z'}, {'id': '6346f10a8f08530b6de77512', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 50 countries gathered for a meeting at Nato headquarters to promise more weapons, including air defences, for Ukraine after Russia launched its most intense missile strikes across the country since the war began.\nThe US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, opened the gathering by condemning the Russian president, Vladimir Putin’s, deadly missile attacks against “targets with no military purpose”. Sitting beside his Ukrainian counterpart, Oleksii Reznikov, Austin said: The whole world has just seen yet again the malice and cruelty of Putin’s war of choice, rooted in aggression and waged with deep contempt for the rules of war. But Russia’s latest assaults have only deepened the determination of the Ukrainian people and further united countries of goodwill from every region on Earth.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T17:21:50Z'}, {'id': '6346eb948f08530b6de77493', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 90,000 Russian fighters have been listed as “irrecoverable” military losses since the beginning of the war in Ukraine, according to a report by the Russian media project iStories. “Irrecoverable losses” is a category that includes servicemen who were killed, went missing, died from their wounds or were disabled and cannot return to military service. The figure is close to US and UK estimates. In August, Britain’s defence minister, Ben Wallace, said the Russian army’s total losses, including deaths, injuries, and desertions, exceeded 80,000.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T16:33:03Z'}, {'id': '6346e7e88f08530b6de77470', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from Gazprom’s chief, Alexei Miller, who has warned that “whole towns” in Europe could freeze this winter despite the continent having almost filled its gas storage facilities. Speaking at the Russia Energy Week conference in Moscow earlier this afternoon, Miller said: Winter can be relatively warm, but one week or even five days will be abnormally cold and it’s possible that whole towns and lands, god forbid, will freeze. During days of peak winter demand, Europe could lack some 800m cubic metres of natural gas per day, or one third of its total consumption, Miller said. European gas inventories are currently about 91% full, with the most pessimistic estimates suggesting they will be at 5% capacity in March, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T16:14:53Z'}, {'id': '6346e21e8f085d1d9ceba958', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US president Joe Biden has said he has not seen any movement from the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, on the release of the American basketball star Brittney Griner. Griner, a two-time Olympic basketball gold medalist, was sentenced to nine years in prison in August after Russian police said they found vape canisters with cannabis oil in her luggage at Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow in February. On Monday, Griner’s defence team appealed against her conviction for narcotics possession and trafficking. The US has said she was wrongfully detained and has offered to exchange her for Viktor Bout, a Russian arms dealer serving a 25-year prison sentence in America. Asked if he had seen any action on Griner’s case, Biden replied: Not from Putin. During his interview with CNN on Tuesday, Biden said he would be willing to meet Putin at the G20 meeting next month if the Russian leader wanted to discuss the detained WNBA star. He said: I have no intention of meeting with him. But for example, if he came to me at the G20 and said I want to talk about the release of Griner, I’d meet with him. I mean, it would depend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T16:18:19Z'}, {'id': '6346e1458f085d1d9ceba950', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the UN’s nuclear watchdog, Rafael Grossi, has tweeted a photo of himself returning to Kyiv after meeting with President Vladimir Putin in St Petersburg yesterday.\nAt Tuesday’s meeting shown on Russian state television, Putin told the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief that the situation around Ukraine’s Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant was “of concern”. The Russian leader also told Grossi that Moscow was open for dialogue and would discuss “all issues” concerning the facility’s operations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T15:46:23Z'}, {'id': '6346dedb8f085d1d9ceba923', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian authorities are mobilising men from the country’s most vulnerable groups to fight in Ukraine, according to a report. Officials in Moscow have taken men from charity centres for the homeless and needy, as well as hostels where labour migrants live, the Moscow Times has cited a report by the independent Mediazona news website. Dozens of homeless men have been taken off the streets and brought to military enlistment offices in the weeks since President Vladimir Putin declared a “partial” mobilisation, according to a group that hands out food to the capital’s homeless community. One source told Mediazona: The police come here without anyone asking. They see a queue of people waiting for food — and then they grab them by the scruff of the neck, against their will. The men are then loaded onto buses and transported to military enlistment offices, the source said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T15:36:37Z'}, {'id': '6346dba68f08253e9d659dab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, has appealed to citizens and businesses to reduce their electricity consumption during peak hours to avoid blackouts. People are being asked to reduce power consumption from 5pm to 10pm across Ukraine by 25% in order to stabilise the power system, which had been damaged by Russian missile attacks. In a statement, Shmyhal said: We are grateful to all Ukrainians who deliberately reduced electricity consumption yesterday and the night before yesterday. The total saving was 10%. We also thank the heads of regions, heads of communities, who took a responsible approach and cut power consumption in communities. He also appealed to people to use gas and coal sparingly after turning on the heating: The minimum permissible indoor temperature this winter will be 16 degrees Celsius, while the average temperature will be 18 degrees. This is a necessity and this is our contribution to the victory. After all, it depends on each of us how we will get through this winter.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T15:22:49Z'}, {'id': '6346d1b38f08530b6de7731c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where we stand: At least seven people were killed and eight injured in a Russian strike on a crowded market in the town of Avdiivka, the governor of Ukraine’s eastern Donetsk region said. “There is no military logic in such shelling - only an unbridled desire to kill as many of our people as possible and intimidate others,” Pavlo Kyrylenko said. President Vladimir Putin says Russia is ready to resume gas supplies via one link of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline that remains operational. The ball was in the EU’s court on whether it wanted gas supplied via the pipeline, Putin said in an address to the Russian Energy Week international forum. The head of the Russian state-owned gas monopoly supplier, Gazprom, has warned Europe of the consequences of renouncing Russian gas. There is “no guarantee” that Europe would survive winter based on its current gas storage capacity, Alexei Miller said, adding that gas in Germany’s underground storage would be enough for between two- and two-and-a-half months. External power has been restored to Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, according to the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Rafael Grossi had warned earlier that the loss of off-site power at the facility, Europe’s largest, was “deeply worrying”. Energoatom, the Ukrainian state-owned company that manages the ZNPP, has accused Russian forces occupying it of refusing a convoy of company vehicles carrying diesel to refuel the plant’s generators after shelling of a substation in the Dnipropetrovsk region caused the plant to lose power. Eight people have been detained over the weekend’s attack on the Crimea bridge, and Russia’s security forces have named a senior figure from Ukraine as being behind them. A senior Ukrainian official dismissed the investigation as “nonsense”. A crowdfunding appeal that was launched after Russian attacks on cities across the country on Monday has raised $9.6m (£8.7m) in 24 hours for the purchase of kamikaze drones for the Ukrainian armed forces. An initial 50 Ram II drones, unmanned aerial vehicles with a 3kg explosive payload, designed and built by Ukrainian companies, will be bought with the money, along with three control stations. Pope Francis condemned Russia’s “relentless bombings” of Ukrainian cities and appealed to “those who have the fate of the war in their hands” to stop. The Vatican’s number two, secretary of state Cardinal Pietro Parolin, said the bombing of unarmed civilians “is beyond any logic. It is to be totally condemned”. President Putin will meet President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in what is likely to be a “very interesting” meeting in Kazakhstan tomorrow, where the Turkish leader may propose ideas for peace in Ukraine, the Kremlin has said. The Russian and Turkish presidents are expected to meet in Kazakhstan’s capital tomorrow on the sidelines of a regional summit. President Joe Biden has said he believes Vladimir Putin is a “rational actor” who badly misjudged his prospects of occupying Ukraine. The US president told CNN on Tuesday that he believed his Russian counterpart had underestimated the ferocity of Ukrainian defiance in the face of invasion, but does not believe he would resort to using a tactical nuclear weapon. Ukraine’s ministry of reintegration has confirmed that 37 Ukrainian children who were illegally deported to Russia have now returned home. The children had been deported from the Russian-occupied territory of Kharkiv region in August, it said in a statement on Facebook. The Kremlin has denied a report that Elon Musk spoke with President Vladimir Putin before publishing his “peace plan” for Ukraine that would have seen territory permanently handed over to Russia. In a mailout sent to Eurasia Group subscribers, Ian Bremmer said the Tesla CEO had told him that Putin was “prepared to negotiate”. Musk has also denied the report. Hello everyone, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you today with all the latest from the Russia-Ukraine war. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T15:07:20Z'}, {'id': '6346ce048f08253e9d659cf1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has depleted a significant proportion of its precision-guided ammunition in its invasion of Ukraine, according to a senior Nato official. Reuters quotes the official as saying that Moscow’s industry cannot produce all kinds of ammunition and weapon systems due to western sanctions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T14:24:24Z'}, {'id': '6346cbf98f085d1d9ceba813', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Vladimir Putin will meet President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in what is likely to be a “very interesting” meeting in Kazakhstan tomorrow, where the Turkish leader may propose ideas for peace in Ukraine, the Kremlin has said. Speaking to reporters, Kremlin aide Yuri Ushakov said: Now many say that the Turks are ready to come up with other initiatives in the context of the settlement of the Ukrainian conflict. There are reports in the press that the Turkish side is putting forward specific considerations in this regard, I do not exclude that Erdoğan will actively touch on this topic during the Astana contact. So a very interesting and, I hope, useful discussion awaits us. The Russian and Turkish presidents are expected to meet in Kazakhstan’s capital tomorrow on the sidelines of a regional summit. The Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, has previously said the potential talks between Russia and the west could be discussed during the meeting.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T14:43:50Z'}, {'id': '6346bfdd8f08530b6de7723d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Netherlands will deliver €15m worth of air defence missiles to Ukraine in reaction to Russian air raids on Ukraine earlier this week. Reuters reports the the defence minister, Kajsa Ollongren, wrote in a letter to parliament: “These attacks ... can only be met with unrelenting support for Ukraine and its people.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T13:35:57Z'}, {'id': '6346bd268f08530b6de77211', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Earlier we reported that Pope Francis had condemned the recent wave of attacks on Ukrainian cities, saying: “My heart is always with the Ukrainian people, especially the residents of the places that have been hit by relentless bombings. May the Lord’s spirit transform the hearts of those who have the fate of the war in their hands, so that the hurricane of violence stops and peaceful coexistence in justice can be rebuilt.” Reuters has now reported an additional quote from the Vatican number two, secretary of state Cardinal Pietro Parolin. Asked if the attacks could be considered war crimes, he said he was not qualified to make such a technical, juridical judgment. “But certainly they are unacceptable acts that cry out vengeance before God and before humanity, because bombing unarmed civilians is beyond any logic. It is to be totally condemned,” Parolin said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T13:21:22Z'}, {'id': '6346b7268f08253e9d659bdc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from the aftermath of Russian attacks on central Kyiv earlier this week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T13:23:20Z'}, {'id': '6346b4e18f08253e9d659bc4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Power has been restored to Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, which is surrounded by Russian troops, according to the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Rafael Grossi, director general of the UN’s nuclear watchdog, had warned earlier today that the nuclear plant, Europe’s biggest, had lost all external power needed for vital safety systems for the second time in five days. Grossi has now tweeted that he has been informed by his team that the external power to the facility has been restored:\nEarlier today, Grossi, who met yesterday with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said IAEA monitors at the Zaporizhzhia plant reported the interruption in external power, and said backup diesel generators were keeping nuclear safety and security equipment operational.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T12:50:35Z'}, {'id': '6346b3d58f08530b6de771a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the Russian state-owned gas monopoly supplier, Gazprom, has warned Europe of the consequences of renouncing Russian gas, saying there is “no guarantee” that Europe would survive winter based on its current gas storage capacity. Speaking at the Russia Energy Week conference in Moscow, Alexei Miller said gas in Germany’s underground storage would be enough for between two- and two-and-a-half months. Miller also said repairs to the damaged Nord Stream pipelines would take at least a year, and that Russia had still not been granted access to the area of damage. Germany and the EU “should respond” if they are interested in restoring the pipeline, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T12:38:04Z'}, {'id': '6346b1318f08253e9d659ba2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Simon Smith, a former British ambassador to Ukraine, writes for us today about how Russian missile strikes on Kyiv and other cities in Ukraine over the past two days stem from Vladimir Putin’s desperation. In their vicious efforts to extinguish Ukraine, the Russians have reached an unprecedented state of weakness and cluelessness, he writes. Putin is signalling that he is paying no heed to any waning commitment to the war among the population at large, following his mobilisation decision. And that he’s listening more closely to those who have been vocally critical of the army’s poor performance, and who have called for a tougher, (even) more ruthless offensive approach. But it goes further than that. It’s also an intimidatory message to Russian citizens opposed to his needless war – or even those simply less convinced of its good sense or justice. Read the full piece here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T12:21:39Z'}, {'id': '6346af1f8f08253e9d659b7a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mykhailo Podolyak, a presidential adviser to Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has called on the west to officially recognise Russia’s aggression and acts in Ukraine as genocide. Russian forces have committed attacks on civilian infrastructure, mass executions and rape, forced deportations, separated families and destroyed Ukrainian literature in schools, Podolyak said on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T12:12:39Z'}, {'id': '6346acfb8f085d1d9ceba6a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from President Vladimir Putin’s address to the Russian Energy Week international forum earlier today, where he proposed that Moscow could redirect gas supplies for the Nord Stream pipelines to the Black Sea to create a major European gas hub in Turkey. Putin said it was possible to repair the damaged pipelines but that Russia and Europe should decide their fate. He said: We could move the lost volumes along the Nord Streams along the bottom of the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea region and thus make the main routes for the supply of our fuel, our natural gas to Europe through Turkey, creating the largest gas hub for Europe in Turkey. He added: That is, of course, if our partners are interested in this. And economic feasibility, of course.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T12:08:56Z'}, {'id': '6346ab328f08253e9d659b43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has denied a report that Elon Musk spoke with President Vladimir Putin before publishing his “peace plan” for Ukraine that would have seen territory permanently handed over to Russia. In a mailout sent to Eurasia Group subscribers, Ian Bremmer said the Tesla CEO had told him that Putin was “prepared to negotiate”. Musk has since denied the report. Asked if Musk had spoken to Putin prior to publishing the Twitter poll, the Kremlin’s spokesperson said: No, this is not true. The pair had communicated over the phone “about a year and a half ago”, Peskov added without providing any details. In a reply to a tweet, Musk said he had spoken to the Russian leader “only once and that was about 18 months ago”. The subject matter of that conversation was “space”, he added. Bremmer subsequently reiterated his initial claims, and said Musk had told him he had spoken with Putin “directly about Ukraine”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:55:58Z'}, {'id': '6346a8bc8f08530b6de77110', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We reported yesterday that children’s doctor Oksana Leontieva was among those killed by Russian missile strikes on Kyiv earlier this week. Leontieva was on her way to work on Monday morning after dropping her son at kindergarten when a Russian missile hit the Ukrainian capital. Now her father, Gregory, has told German newspaper Bild that her death has left her five-year-old son an orphan after his father recently died as well. He added: Oksana had called the hospital in the morning because the kindergarten couldn’t take her son due to warnings of a possible attack. In the end, they did take Grischa ... and she went to work. Gregory said the boy had not yet been told his mother had died. Gregory said: For now he thinks she is at work and working very hard. We will tell him today or tomorrow. The doctor’s funeral is due to be held later this week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:46:55Z'}, {'id': '6346a5358f085d1d9ceba622', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The number of people wounded after a Russian strike on a crowded market in the town of Avdiivka in Ukraine’s Donetsk region has risen to nine, according to a city official. At least seven people were killed after the Russian shelling on the market this morning, Vitalii Barabash, the head of the Avdiivka city military administration, said. In a statement on Telegram, Barabash said: Today is another black day for our Avdiivka. In the morning, the Russian evil spirits once again brought death to our land, sneakily, as always, shelling the central market with tanks and MLR systems during rush hour. Seven residents of Avdiivka were killed and nine were wounded.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:30:32Z'}, {'id': '63469cfb8f08530b6de7704d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Commission wants at least €18bn (£15.8bn) in emergency aid to help Ukraine’s government stay afloat next year, as an economic crisis looms in the country. Officials in Brussels think the EU should provide at least half the €3bn-€3.5bn monthly running costs it estimates the Ukrainian state needs to function in 2023, the Guardian has learned. The financial aid would most likely be in the form of cheap loans with long repayment deadlines. But it would require EU member states to find extra money to guarantee the loans and potentially pay the interest. According to the World Bank, Ukraine’s economy is on course to shrink by more than one third (35%) in 2022, as a result of the widespread destruction of factories, infrastructure, fertile land, as well as the displacement of 14 million people. EU sources fear that if Ukraine cannot afford to pay its bills it could print money, triggering inflation. EU officials are optimistic about an agreement on the new financial aid, despite long delays in releasing €9bn funding for Ukraine promised in May. Nearly five months since the commission proposed €9bn in “macro financial assistance” for Ukraine, only €1bn has been released. Earlier this month, Brussels and Kyiv signed an agreement on the next €5bn, paving the way for a €2bn tranche to be released this month. EU member states have been wrangling over whether aid to Ukraine should be offered as non-repayable grants, as favoured by Germany, or cheap loans, the option backed by most member states. The money would allow the Ukrainian government to pay salaries, fund humanitarian relief and make emergency repairs to some essential infrastructure. But it falls far short of the vast costs of rebuilding Ukraine, estimated by the World Bank to be $349bn (€359bn, £315bn).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:30:24Z'}, {'id': '6346a2378f085d1d9ceba5ea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Vladimir Putin says Russia is ready to resume gas supplies via one link of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline that remains operational, in his address to the Russian Energy Week international forum. The Russian leader said gas could still be supplied by one remaining intact part of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. The ball was in the EU’s court on whether it wanted gas supplied via the pipeline, he said. Putin says: Russia is ready to start such supplies. The ball is in the court of the EU. If they want, they can just open the tap. He went on to say that Russia has nothing to do with the sky-high energy prices that Europeans are facing this winter, instead blaming the west for stoking a global energy crisis. It was the poorest countries that would pay the highest price in terms of rising energy costs, Putin added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:36:54Z'}, {'id': '63469f1e8f08253e9d659a88', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, is currently addressing the Russian Energy Week international forum’s plenary session. Large leaks that suddenly erupted in the Nord Stream gas pipelines running from Russia to Europe were an “act of international terrorism” that set a “dangerous precedent”.\nPutin says: There is no doubt it was an act of international terrorism, aiming to undermine the energy security of a whole continent. The calculation behind it was quite cynical, to block and destroy the cheap energy sources and deprive millions of people and industrial consumers of gas, heat, power and other resources. The “attack” against the Nord Stream pipelines was a “most dangerous precedent”, he continued: It shows that any piece of critical transport energy or communications infrastructure is at risk now. Putin goes on to blame Ukrainian special services for what he calls the “terrorist attack” against the Kerch bridge connecting Russia to Crimea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:28:07Z'}, {'id': '63469c1d8f08253e9d659a66', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least seven people were killed and eight injured in a Russian strike on a crowded market in the town of Avdiivka, the governor of Ukraine’s eastern Donetsk region said. In a statement, Pavlo Kyrylenko said: The Russians struck the central market where many people were at that time. He added: There is no military logic in such shelling - only an unbridled desire to kill as many of our people as possible and intimidate others. More to follow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T10:52:33Z'}, {'id': '63469ac38f08253e9d659a43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s ministry of reintegration has confirmed that 37 Ukrainian children who were illegally deported to Russia have now returned home. The children had been deported from the Russian-occupied territory of Kharkiv region in August, it said in a statement on Facebook. The statement reads: At the end of August, the little ones were forcibly taken out of Kharkiv region to the Russian township of Kabardinka (near Gelendzhik), despite the fact that everyone has parents. The families had been reunited, it said. The ministry described the return process as difficult but successful.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T11:31:20Z'}, {'id': '6346986c8f08530b6de7700a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A crowdfunding appeal that was launched after Russian attacks on cities across the country on Monday has raised $9.6m (£8.7m) in 24 hours for the purchase of kamikaze drones for the Ukrainian armed forces. An initial 50 Ram II drones, unmanned aerial vehicles with a 3kg explosive payload, designed and built by Ukrainian companies, will be bought with the money, along with three control stations. Further munitions would be secured over the coming days, said Serhiy Prytula, who organised the initiative. He said: “They wanted to scare us but we united even more. Remember: never infuriate Ukrainians. Never. The people have donated for the revenge, so we will ensure the revenge happens.” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, told G7 leaders on Tuesday via video conference that Russia had used a variety of munitions to strike Ukrainian cities over the previous two days, killing 20 people. “The enemy has used more than 100 cruise missiles, dozens of different drones, including Iranian Shaheds,” he said. “And every 10 minutes I receive a message about the enemy’s use of Iranian Shaheds.” Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T10:36:05Z'}, {'id': '634695c78f08253e9d659a07', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said rhetoric from western leaders on the potential use of nuclear weapons was “provocative”. Speaking to reporters during his regular briefing, Peskov said: We express our daily regret that Western heads of state – the US as well as European – engage in nuclear rhetoric every day. We consider this a pernicious and provocative practice. Russia does not want to take part in these exercises and does not take part in them. Leaders from the Group of Seven (G7) countries yesterday warned of “severe consequences” if Russia decided to use nuclear weapons, in a statement after a call with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The US president, Joe Biden, warned that threats from Russia could result in catastrophic “mistakes” and “miscalculation”, a week after he said the risk of “nuclear Armageddon” was at its highest level in 60 years. Peskov added that there had been no attempt from either Washington or Moscow to discuss a potential meeting between Biden and President Vladimir Putin. The Kremlin also denied reports from some regional officials that they were stepping up mobilisation efforts. “There is no new wave,” Peskov said, telling reporters to check with individual governors to see what they meant. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Martin Belam to bring you all the latest developments from the Russia-Ukraine war. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T10:47:20Z'}, {'id': '63468dd18f08530b6de76f81', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Eight people have been detained over the weekend’s attack on the Crimea bridge, and Russia’s security forces have named a senior figure from Ukraine as being behind them. A statement from the Federal Security Service (FSB) claimed “the organiser of the terrorist attack on the Crimean Bridge was the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ukrainian Defence Ministry, its head Kyrylo Budanov, employees and agents. Currently, five citizens of Russia, three citizens of Ukraine and Armenia, who participated in the preparation of the crime, have been detained within the framework of the criminal case.” A senior Ukrainian official dismissed the investigation as “nonsense”. “The whole activity of the FSB and Investigative Committee is nonsense,” Ukraine’s public broadcaster Suspilne cited interior minister spokesman Andriy Yusov as saying. He described the FSB and Investigative Committee as “fake structures that serve the Putin regime, so we will definitely not comment on their next statements”. The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency has described developments at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP), which has lost off-site power, as “deeply worrying”. Energoatom, the Ukrainian state-owned company that manages the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP) has accused Russian forces occupying it of refusing a convoy of company vehicles carrying diesel to refuel the plant’s generators after shelling of a substation in the Dnipropetrovsk region caused the plant to lose power. Pope Francis on Wednesday condemned Russia’s “relentless bombings” of Ukrainian cities and appealed to “those who have the fate of the war in their hands” to stop. He was quoted as saying “My heart is always turned to the people of Ukraine, especially those living in places hit by the bombing”. The pontiff prayed for an intercession that “may change the hearts of those who have the fate of the war in their hands, so that they may cease this wave of violence and rebuild peaceful coexistence”. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, is a “rational actor who has miscalculated significantly,” US president Joe Biden said in a clip of a CNN interview broadcast late on Tuesday.\nRussia continued to attack key infrastructure in Ukraine with missile strikes on Tuesday. Amid warnings from the UN and some Nato countries that Moscow may be committing a war crime with its continuing deadly blitz on civilian targets, Russia’s defence ministry confirmed its troops continued to launch long-range airstrikes on Ukraine’s energy and military infrastructure. The leaders of the G7 on Tuesday condemned Russia’s most recent missile attacks on cities across Ukraine “in the strongest possible terms” and vowed to stand “firmly” with Kyiv “for as long as it takes”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, had asked G7 leaders to supply more air defence systems and for an international monitoring mission on the Belarusian border. Roughly 30% of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure has been hit by Russia since Monday, officials said. As millions in Ukraine are facing blackouts due to the attacks, the government has urged civilians to cut their electricity use and not use domestic appliances such as ovens and washing machines. That is it from me Martin Belam, for now. I will be back later. Léonie Chao-Fong will be with you shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T10:04:02Z'}, {'id': '634689a98f08253e9d65996c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s security forces have released what they claim is an X-ray image of the cargo that caused the explosion at the weekend on the Crimea bridge.\nThe veracity of the image, and its source, has not been independently verified. It has been issued as part of their investigation which has led to the arrest of eight individuals today [see 7.13am]. Russia has claimed the plan was masterminded by Ukrainian officials, a suggestion which has been dismissed as “nonsense” by Ukraine’s interior minister spokesperson, Andriy Yusov [see 9.08am].', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T09:49:10Z'}, {'id': '634684748f08530b6de76f19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s Dmitry Peskov has said that comments made by Nato General Secretary Jens Stoltenberg could be considered confirmation that Nato is fighting on Ukraine’s side in Kyiv’s conflict with Russia. Reuters remind us that yesterday Stoltenberg said that a Russian victory in Ukraine would be “a defeat for us all” During his regular morning media briefing, the Kremlin spokesperson also said rhetoric from western leaders on the potential use of nuclear weapons was harmful and provocative. “We express our daily regret that western heads of state engage in nuclear rhetoric every day,” Peskov said, adding that such a practice was “provocative”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T09:16:04Z'}, {'id': '63467cb48f08253e9d65990e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Energoatom, the Ukrainian state-owned company that manages the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP) has accused Russian forces occupying it of refusing a convoy of company vehicles carrying diesel to refuel the plant’s generators. It has been cut off from off-site power. In a statement posted to Telegram, Energoatom said: This morning, 12 October at 8.59am, as a result of rocket fire by Russian troops, the Dniprovska substation in the Dnipropetrovsk region was damaged. As a result, the 750-kV communication line of ZANP – Dniprovska was accidentally opened. As a result, the ZNPP was completely de-energized. Diesel generators turned on automatically. Energoatom prepared and sent another batch of diesel fuel to the ZNPP. However, as of 10am, the Russian side does not allow the company’s convoy of vehicles to pass. Russian shelling and damage to energy infrastructure related to the operation of nuclear power plants is the same manifestation of nuclear terrorism as direct shelling of the ZNPP, and leads to the same consequences and threats of a radiation accident. The occupiers continue to neglect the nuclear and radiation safety of the largest nuclear power plant in Europe, threatening the world with a radiation disaster. The claims have not been independently verified. Both sides have previously accused the other of shelling the ZNPP directly, which sits in one of the occupied regions that Russia has claimed to “annex”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T08:44:11Z'}, {'id': '634679208f08530b6de76ec0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis condemned Russia’s “relentless bombings” of Ukrainian cities and appealed to “those who have the fate of the war in their hands” to stop.\nHe was quoted as saying “My heart is always turned to the people of Ukraine, especially those living in places hit by the bombing.” The pontiff prayed for an intercession that “may change the hearts of those who have the fate of the war in their hands, so that they may cease this wave of violence and rebuild peaceful coexistence”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T08:56:40Z'}, {'id': '6346756f8f08253e9d6598e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior Ukrainian official dismissed as “nonsense” on Wednesday Russia’s investigation into an explosion last weekend that badly damaged a bridge linking the Russian mainland to the Crimea peninsula that Moscow annexed from Ukraine in 2014. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has blamed Ukraine’s security forces for the explosion, and earlier today Russia’s Federal Security Service (FSB) said it had detained five Russians and three citizens of Ukraine and Armenia over the blast. “The whole activity of the FSB and Investigative Committee is nonsense,” Ukraine’s public broadcaster Suspilne cited the interior minister spokesperson, Andriy Yusov, as saying when asked about Moscow’s allegations on the Crimea Bridge blast. Reuters reports Yusov described the FSB and Investigative Committee as “fake structures that serve the Putin regime, so we will definitely not comment on their next statements”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T09:00:04Z'}, {'id': '634674ef8f085d1d9ceba3f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'RIA Novosti, the Russian state-owned news agency, has a breaking news story quoting Yevgeny Balitsky, the Russian-installed leader of occupied Zaporizhzhia, saying that a nuclear safety zone cannot be established around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant “until the frontline is pushed at least 100km, otherwise it is unsafe”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T09:03:39Z'}, {'id': '634671008f08530b6de76e91', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency has described developments at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP), which has lost off-site power, as “deeply worrying”. Rafael Grossi tweeted: Our team at the ZNPP informed me this morning that the plant has lost all of its external power for the second time in five days. Its back-up diesel generators are now providing electricity for its nuclear safety and security functions. This repeated loss of the ZNPP’s off-site power is a deeply worrying development and it underlines the urgent need for a nuclear safety and security protection zone around the site. The ZNPP has been occupied by Russian forces but operated by Ukrainian staff since early in Russia’s latest invasion of Ukraine. Russia has claimed to have “annexed” Zaporizhzhia, and stated it intends to take the plant under its own operational framework.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T07:51:36Z'}, {'id': '634670768f08530b6de76e8d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'You can understand there being jitters about Europe’s power infrastructure after the Nord Stream pipeline incident, but Poland’s top official in charge of energy infrastructure, Mateusz Berger, has told Reuters by telephone that there are no grounds to believe the leak in the Polish section of the Druzhba oil pipeline was caused by sabotage. “Here we can talk about accidental damage,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T07:46:17Z'}, {'id': '63466c208f085d1d9ceba3b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is carrying a report, citing the Russian Interfax news agency, that Russia’s Transneft state-owned pipeline monopoly said on Wednesday it had received notice from Polish operator Pern about a leak on the Druzhba oil pipeline. Transneft stated that oil continues to be pumped towards Poland, and that Pern had not yet said how long repairs would take. The pipeline was built by the Soviet Union in the 1960s to pump oil from eastern regions of Russia into the satellite states of the Soviet bloc, and it now carries oil to points in Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Austria and Germany.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T07:29:57Z'}, {'id': '634669c88f08253e9d6598a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dmytro Zhyvytskyi, governor of Sumy, has posted to Telegram to say that “the night was quiet” in his region, but that in the morning Russians resumed shelling at the border. As of 10am local time he had no information on casualties.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T07:18:20Z'}, {'id': '634662658f08530b6de76e3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian MP Lisa Yasko has been interviewed from Strasbourg by Sky News in the UK, and has said that delays in delivering assistance to Ukraine were “incredibly frustrating”, and that she felt little comfort from suggestions that there were no signs Russia was about to deploy nuclear weapons in Ukraine. She told viewers: I know that sometimes, some western countries, they’re just far and they don’t feel the urgency, which is incredibly frustrating for us. Because you know, we don’t have time for discussion. So we are screaming, we are trying to to do everything possible to defend with our weapons, our people, every second. Asked about the head of British GCHQ, Jeremy Fleming, talking down the prospect of the use of nuclear weapons, she said: I don’t think it can offer me a comfort, because the threat of nuclear war is very, very high. We understand that Putin doesn’t have any logic anymore. It’s not possible to justify Putin anymore. We understand that he is in the final battle of his life, where he wants to prove to all the world that he can do whatever he wants, including taking lands, killing thousands of people, destroying infrastructure, and we understand that nuclear threats and a strike is very possible. Yesterday Fleming said “I would hope that we would see indicators if they started to go down that path,” and suggested that “The way in which the Russian military machine and President Putin are conducting this war, they are staying within the doctrine that we understand for their use, including for nuclear weapons.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:54:16Z'}, {'id': '634661a38f085d1d9ceba382', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a video clip from Joe Biden’s CNN TV interview, where he says that he believed his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin had underestimated the ferocity of Ukrainian defiance in the face of invasion. ‘I think … he thought he was going to be welcomed with open arms, that this was the home of Mother Russia in Kyiv, and that he was going to be welcomed, and I think he just totally miscalculated,’ Biden said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:42:39Z'}, {'id': '63465fa18f085d1d9ceba372', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s state-owned news agency RIA Novosti is carrying some more details of the plot to damage the Crimea bridge which Russian security forces claim to have revealed today. It reports: In early August, the cargo was sent from the seaport of Odesa to the Bulgarian Ruse [port] … From Bulgaria it proceeded to the Georgian port of Poti , and then to Armenia. From 29 September to 3 October, at the Transalliance terminal in Yerevan, the cargo was cleared … On a DAF truck registered in Georgia, the cargo crossed the Russian-Georgian border on 4 October at the Upper Lars checkpoint, two days later it was delivered and unloaded at a wholesale base in Armavir. On 7 October … the documents for the cargo were again changed. TEK-34 LLC from Ulyanovsk was indicated as the sender , and a non-existent company in the Crimea was indicated as the recipient. The movement of cargo along the entire route was controlled by an employee of the main intelligence directorate of the ministry of defence of Ukraine, who introduced himself to the participants in the scheme as “Ivan Ivanovich”. To coordinate actions, he used a virtual anonymous number, as well as a phone registered to a resident of Kremenchug. RIA reminds us that the explosion occurred on 8 October, and that the official account is “a truck exploded on the Crimean bridge after which seven tanks with fuel of a passing train caught fire. Two car spans partially collapsed, but the bridge arch supports were not damaged. Four people were killed, including a judge from Moscow.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:39:38Z'}, {'id': '63465f008f08253e9d659860', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Polish pipeline operator Pern detected a leak on Tuesday evening in one line of the Druzhba pipeline, which carries oil from Russia to Europe, it said on Wednesday. Pern said at this point the causes of the leak are unknown. It was detected in a section of the pipe around 70km from the central Polish city of Plock. The second line of the pipeline, and other elements of Pern’s infrastructure, were working as normal, Pern said. “At this point, all Pern services (technical, operational, in-house fire brigade and environmental protection) are taking action in accordance with the algorithms provided for this type of situation,” Reuters reports the operator said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:31:41Z'}, {'id': '63465c328f08253e9d65984e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic has claimed that five people were injured and 17 houses were damaged by fire from Ukrainian forces in the last 24 hours. Donetsk is one of the occupied regions that Russia has claimed to annex. The Donetsk People’s Republic was declared in 2014, and Russia, Syria and North Korea are the only UN member states to recognise it as a legitimate authority. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:23:14Z'}, {'id': '63465b788f08253e9d659840', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Serhai Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, has posted an update on Telegram on Ukraine’s military progress in the occupied Luhansk region. He writes: The armed forces of Ukraine are moving forward little by little. The Russians are shelling our positions mainly with rocket and barrel artillery. The occupiers are building a multi-layer defence line in Luhansk region, the entire first section of the front line is mined by them. Our military has already encountered the first wave of partially mobilised Russians. Luhansk is one of the region of occupied Ukraine which the Russian Federation has claimed to annex following a widely-derided “referendum”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:17:47Z'}, {'id': '634659718f08530b6de76e09', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Eight people have been detained over the weekend’s attack on the Crimea bridge, and Russia’s security forces have named a senior figure from Ukraine as being behind them, according to reports from the state-owned Tass news agency. It quotes a statement from the Federal Security Service (FSB) saying: The Federal Security Service, together with the Investigative Committee, established that the organiser of the terrorist attack on the Crimean Bridge was the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Ukrainian Defence Ministry, its head Kyrylo Budanov, employees and agents. Currently, five citizens of Russia, three citizens of Ukraine and Armenia, who participated in the preparation of the crime, have been detained within the framework of the criminal case. The FSB claims that the explosives which caused a section of the bridge to collapse were sent from Odessa through Bulgaria, Georgia and Armenia. Tass reports that the cargo carrying the explosives was being sent to a non-existent company in Crimea, which Russia annexed in 2014. This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T06:13:05Z'}, {'id': '63464d5a8f08530b6de76dd8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 20 Russians have sailed in yachts from North Pacific ports to South Korea, Reuters reports, as they flee to avoid military call-up to fight in Ukraine. Most have reportedly been refused entry. There has been an exodus of conscription-age men from Russia since President Vladimir Putin ordered a partial mobilisation on 21 September, but most fled by road, rail and air to Europe, and neighbouring former Soviet Union countries, like Georgia, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan. On Tuesday, South Korean broadcaster KBS reported that at least 21 Russians had arrived aboard yachts at ports in the south of the country, but only two had been granted entry, while others were refused as authorities deemed their purpose “ambiguous”. KBS reported that three yachts had docked in the southeastern port city of Pohang over the past several days, mostly carrying Russian men in their 20-30s. An official at Pohang’s coast guard declined to comment when contacted by Reuters. A justice ministry official said he did not have details about the yacht cases, but Russians are in general allowed to enter the country without a visa as long as they obtain prior approval via South Korea’s electronic travel authorisation system.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T05:30:18Z'}, {'id': '63464a738f085d1d9ceba2fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK Ministry of Defence has published its latest update on the situation in Ukraine, in which it reports that 60% of the “Shahed” drones launched by Russia on 10 October were destroyed in the air. The drones are manufactured in Iran. “These UAVs are slow and fly at low altitudes making lone aircraft easy to target using conventional air defences. There is a realistic possibility that Russia has achieved some success by attacking with several UAVs at the same time,” according to the UK Ministry of Defence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T05:11:11Z'}, {'id': '634648178f08253e9d6597e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian President Vladimir Putin has accepted an invitation to attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Bangkok next month, according to a report in the Bangkok Post, which cites an unnamed security source. Both the G20 and Apec summits will be held in Southeast Asia in November, with gatherings overshadowed by the war in Ukraine. Ministerial meetings held over the past year have been marred by confrontation and walkouts. Xi Jinping, Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden are reportedly expected to attend the G20 summit in Bali between 15 and 15th November, while Indonesia has also invited the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, to attend. Apec will be held on 18 and 19 November. On Tuesday, Lavrov said that Putin would not turn down a meeting with Biden in Bali. Talking on Russian state TV, he said that Moscow was open to talks with the west on the Ukraine war but had yet to receive any “serious offers” to negotiate. He said US officials including the White House’s national security spokesperson, John Kirby, had said the US was willing to engage in discussions but Russia had refused. “This is a lie”, he added. Biden is not expected to be at Apec and will instead return home to attend his granddaughter’s wedding ceremony, according to Thai media. It is not known whether Xi will attend Apec.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T04:59:44Z'}, {'id': '634643198f085d1d9ceba2d5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Would Lukashenko really throw Belarus into a war Russia is losing? Andrew Roth and Daniel Boffey tackle the question in a new analysis piece. Alexander Lukashenko, the dictatorial leader of Belarus, has executed a careful balancing act during the war in Ukraine. On 24 February, Russian troops that had massed on Belarusian territory surged across the border into Ukraine, using his country as a staging ground in the largest invasion in Europe since the second world war. But the Belarusian leader has not joined the war directly or sent his own troops into the fight, at times saying that he felt the invasion was “dragging on”. Now, meetings between Lukashenko and Vladimir Putin have once again raised fears he is about to enter the fray. Lukashenko has said that Belarus and Russia are to deploy a joint military group and that thousands of Russian troops will be arriving in his country in the coming days for drills. “We emphasise once again that the tasks of the regional force group are purely defensive. And all activities carried out at the moment are aimed at providing a sufficient response to actions near our borders,” the Belarusian defence minister, Viktor Khrenin, said in a statement on Tuesday. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, sounded the alarm during a meeting of the G7 on Tuesday, proposing to send UN peacekeepers to the border between Ukraine and Belarus to prevent Lukashenko from launching a “provocation”. Despite the warning signs, there is considerable doubt that Lukashenko is ready to throw his own forces into a war that Russia is losing in Ukraine, even if he is under pressure from Putin.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T04:41:47Z'}, {'id': '63463dfe8f085d1d9ceba2b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Energy exports appear to be helping Russia ride out Western sanctions, AFP reports. Moscow says inflation is easing and employment is virtually full, contradicting the predictions of a catastrophe from many financial experts. The International Monetary Fund on Tuesday offered some support to Russia’s view, saying recession will be less severe than expected due to oil exports and relatively stable domestic demand. The IMF forecast the Russian economy to contract just 3.4% over the whole year, after contracting 21.8% during the second quarter at a quarterly annualised rate. It was only in June that the IMF forecast an annual drop of 6%.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T04:11:59Z'}, {'id': '634623d48f085d1d9ceba24c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When US President Joe Biden was asked in a Tuesday evening interview on CNN whether he thinks Putin will use nuclear weapons, he said, “I don’t think he will.” Biden was speaking after warning last week that the world faced the most acute nuclear threat for 60 years –since the Cuban missile crisis. “The whole point I was making was it could lead to just a horrible outcome,” he told Tapper. “And not because anybody intends to turn it into a world war or anything, but just once you use a nuclear weapon, the mistakes that can be made, the miscalculations, who knows what would happen.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T04:00:06Z'}, {'id': '6346278e8f08253e9d659738', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian troops have sustained equipment and personnel losses in Ukraine’s south, the Kyiv Independent reported, citing Ukraine’s Operational Command. “Ukraine’s Operational Command ‘South’ reported that they completed over 300 fire missions, targeting and damaging two Russian Gvozdika self-propelled howitzers and an APC,” the Kyiv Independent said in a tweet.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T03:59:24Z'}, {'id': '63461d1f8f085d1d9ceba223', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to today’s live coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war. My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be taking you through the latest developments for the next while. Russian troops have sustained losses in Ukraine’s south following 300 fire missions, Ukraine’s Operational Command reported overnight. Meanwhile, in an interview with CNN on Tuesday evening, US President Joe Biden said he doesn’t think Putin will use a tactical nuclear weapon. Biden was speaking after warning last week that the world faced the most acute nuclear threat for 60 years –since the Cuban missile crisis. We’ll have more on this shortly. In the meantime, here are the key recent developments in the conflict: Russia continued to attack key infrastructure in Ukraine with missile strikes on Tuesday. Amid warnings from the UN and some Nato countries that Moscow may be committing a war crime with its continuing deadly blitz on civilian targets, Russia’s defence ministry confirmed its troops continued to launch long-range airstrikes on Ukraine’s energy and military infrastructure. The leaders of the G7 condemned Russia’s most recent missile attacks on cities across Ukraine “in the strongest possible terms” and vowed to stand “firmly” with Kyiv “for as long as it takes”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, asked G7 leaders to supply more air defence systems and for an international monitoring mission on the Belarusian border. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, described Russia’s attacks as “a profound change in the nature of this war”. During Russia’s strikes in recent days, cruise missiles and armed drones rained down on parks, playgrounds, power stations and other civilian targets. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, is a “rational actor who has miscalculated significantly,” US president Joe Biden said in a clip of a CNN interview broadcast on Tuesday. Ukrainian authorities said on Tuesday they exhumed the bodies of dozens of people, including civilians and a one-year-old baby, to determine the cause of death after the retreat of Russian troops from Lyman and Sviatohirsk, two recently liberated towns in the eastern Donetsk region. Roughly 30% of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure has been hit by Russia since Monday, officials said. As millions in Ukraine are facing blackouts due to the attacks, the government has urged civilians to cut their electricity use and not use domestic appliances such as ovens and washing machines. The Kremlin has confirmed that Putin will meet Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, on Thursday to discuss Ukraine. Moscow would not turn down a meeting between Putin and Biden at the G20 meeting next month, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said. Moscow was open to talks with the west on the Ukraine war but had yet to receive any “serious offers” to negotiate, Lavrov said in an interview on Russian state television. Putin has told the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency that he is “open to dialogue” on the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Meanwhile the deputy head of the Zaporizhzhia power plant has been kidnapped by Russian forces, Ukraine’s state nuclear energy company Energoatom said. Valeriy Martynyuk was taken on Monday and is being detained in an unknown location, Energoatom said in a post on Telegram. Elon Musk denied a report that he spoke with Putin before tweeting a proposal to end the war in Ukraine that would have seen territory permanently handed over to Russia. Belarus’ defence ministry said the joint deployment of forces with Russia on its borders is a defensive measure. The moves were to ensure “security” along the border between Belarus and Ukraine, it claimed. Russian strikes have damaged hundreds of cultural sites, Zelenskiy said as he urged the UN cultural agency to expel Russia, which currently holds the rotating presidency of the Unesco World Heritage Committee.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T03:50:50Z'}, {'id': '6346e7a38f085d1d9ceba999', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A deal is being thrashed out to spare a British pensioner, accused of the premeditated murder in Cyprus of his terminally ill wife, from spending the rest of his life behind bars. David Hunter, a former Northumberland miner, faces the prospect of being handed a 25-year sentence if found guilty. But on Wednesday, as Paphos district court reconvened to hear the groundbreaking case, it became clear that the Briton’s fate hung on an agreement being reached that would have him plead guilty to manslaughter when the court sits again on 18 November. “We have studied the case and recommended that the charge be changed from premeditated murder to manslaughter,” deputy state prosecutor Andreas Hadjikyrou told reporters. “It is the right thing for David. He would otherwise spend the rest of his life in prison.” David and Janice Hunter, teenage sweethearts when they first fell in love, had lived together for more than 50 years when, less than a week before Christmas last year, the 75-year-old allegedly beseeched her husband to end what had become a life of extreme suffering due to advanced leukaemia. Hunter said he finally succumbed to his wife’s wishes, using his bare hands to block her air passages and smother her to death – an act that took 15 minutes – in the sitting room of the couple’s rented maisonette outside the resort town on the country’s south-west coast. He then attempted to take his own life by overdosing on prescription pills and alcohol, before being found by police who were alerted by his brother, who had been called by Hunter. “From the start we said it was in no one’s interest if David was given a lengthy prison sentence, and if we can come to an agreement on the facts, which we hopefully can, we hope that the court will consider a suspended sentence, so that he can return to the UK to be with his family,” said Michael Polak of the British legal aid group, Justice Abroad, who flew to the island for the trial. “It is positive that the prosecution and ourselves are coming closer together in understanding the facts.” In the absence of a suicide note, the process of changing the charge in a country where euthanasia is outlawed has not been easy. Although Janice Hunter had received hospital care which included injections and blood transfusions, the degree to which she was suffering from leukaemia – a disease that also killed her sister, Kathleen, decades earlier – remains a possible point of contention, according to the prosecution. “It is historic in that it is the first case of its kind in Cyprus,” Polak told the Guardian, saying he had handed the court a copy of Kathleen’s death certificate stating that she died in appalling pain from complications sustained from leukaemia. “But there is considerable case law in other common-law countries that would support [our case].” The former miner spent several weeks in hospital where doctors who had pumped his stomach described him as having no desire to live after the death of his wife. Now 75, he appeared ruddy faced and considerably thinner as he stood in the dock, clasping the bench with both hands while a court interpreter translated proceedings. The past nine months incarcerated in Nicosia’s vastly overcrowded central prison was replete with problems, not least the loneliness of being without his companion of so many years, despite daily phone calls to his daughter, Lesley, back home. “Cyprus was paradise, she loved it,” Hunter said before being returned under police escort to his 11-man cell in the island’s capital. “We never regretted moving here. It was a life in the sun before Janice got ill.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T18:44:08Z'}, {'id': '6346e3e68f085d1d9ceba96c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mohammed bin Salman had seen it coming. The groundswell of anger in Washington was clear and building since he helped lead an Opec+ decision to cut the world’s oil supply last week. But for the first time in the modern era of ties between the US and Saudi Arabia, there was no rush to placate hard feelings, or gloss over a rift. This was the birth of a new realpolitik, where nascent Saudi nationalism paid no heed to a historical ally and instead aligned itself to what Riyadh literally sees as a new world order.\nThe decision by Opec+ – the oil production cartel led by Saudi Arabia, plus Russia – was the clearest sign yet that relations between Washington and Riyadh have reached a nadir and, perhaps more importantly, that such a situation does not overly concern the de facto Saudi leader. For months before Joe Biden’s July visit to Jeddah and especially in the three months since, Saudi social media was buzzing with talk of a “swagger” shown by Prince Mohammed and, by extension, Saudi Arabia. The 37-year-old heir to the throne had used the time to stake out what a kingdom on his watch would look like and how it would project. Riyadh would no longer be a Flintstones-like theocracy that eschewed progress and hid behind a US security umbrella, he insisted, but a wealthy middle power in its own right that chose its friends, on its own terms. Biden, who had described the crown prince as a pariah that he would avoid while in office, was not to be one of them. Oil, the biggest tool in its basket of offerings, was no more to be a prize doled out to friends at mates’ rates, but an instrument to be weaponised – for Saudi interests. The new stances shattered accommodations that had underwritten bilateral relations between the US and Saudi Arabia, in particular an informal pact that had guaranteed the kingdom’s security in return for keeping the oil valves open and – when it mattered – bowser prices low. Such new positions in isolation would have been uncomfortable enough for a US government that had come to take as a given that Riyadh would have its back when it mattered. But in the context of Russia’s war in Ukraine a new geopolitical dynamic has emerged. In cutting output to keep prices high, Saudi Arabia has allied with Russia and, in doing so, indirectly boosted Vladimir Putin’s war effort, just as the Russian leader was foundering. Riyadh has countered by saying that the decision to slash output by 2m barrels was purely commercial and suggested it needed an oil price of around $100 to sustain the enormous investments the kingdom has made across Saudi Arabia to fund economic and cultural programs. There is indeed a business case to be made for a higher price per barrel, but Prince Mohammed’s risk/reward ratio has clearly been recalibrated.\nAt nearly all points in the past 70 years, Riyadh would have thought twice before making such a move, or at least tried to explain its imperatives to Washington before doing so. The optics this time were always going to reflect that this was a vote for Putin, and a disendorsement of Biden, who now faces the prospect of taking higher pump prices to midterm elections in November. Prince Mohammed’s critics in Washington, and particularly among Democrats, have accused him of direct interference in a US election, a move that would carry great weight. Whether true, or not, Biden has taken the apparent snub personally and is now threatening to rewrite the relationship in ways that Riyadh could potentially find uncomfortable, including stopping weapons sales. Saudi Arabia has had constant access to cutting edge US weaponry for decades, and its security has been underwritten by US technology and troops on ground for the past 30 years. The anger of Biden and the Democrats appears to place that in jeopardy.\nFor now, Prince Mohammed is sticking to a position that Saudi Arabia chooses its own friends through the lens of its interests. In Putin he sees a figure in his likeness, nakedly authoritarian, avowedly nationalistic, self interested, hostile to human rights and waiting for the return of Donald Trump. The Russian leader will hardly hound Prince Mohammed on detainees or crackdowns on dissent and nor will China’s leader, Xi Jinping, another firm Saudi ally, who appears back in the market for oil, no matter the price. The chances of a re-elected Trump emerging as a critic appear just as slim. In Moscow on Monday, the Emirati president, Mohammed bin Zayed, a Saudi ally, was received as a friend by Putin, who gave him a cloak to shield him from the autumn cold, in a clear display of personal warmth between the pair. Prince Mohammed too has also enjoyed Putin’s public embrace. But a trip to Moscow seems a bridge too far for even him as the feud with Washington simmers. In perhaps a sign of conciliation, Saudi Arabia seems likely to vote in favour of censuring Russia at the United Nations for annexing Ukrainian territories in recent months. But such a move will do little to mollify US anger, which seems ready to escalate the crisis even further.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-12T17:47:30Z'}]}