{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': ' Zelenskiy says Russia wants to ‘destroy’ Ukraine’s entire Donbas region', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-18T06:54:55Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/18/zelenskiy-says-russia-wants-to-destroy-ukraines-entire-donbas-region', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Farrer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinfarrer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 7, 'elements': [{'id': '624d6b7e8f083703c7bd6c5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Facebook has been accused of failing to invest sufficiently to combat misinformation as it pursues rapid growth in Africa, where the Covid pandemic has highlighted the outsize role played by social media in online discourse. Traditional media and governments have an increasingly limited ability to control information flows on the continent, as social media platforms including Facebook seek to expand rapidly, though largely without fanfare. “Facebook are losing users left, right and centre in the global north, so where are the new users coming from? The global south,” said Anri van der Spuy, a senior researcher at Research ICT Africa, a thinktank. Sub-Saharan Africa has a population of 1.1 billion and, at an average of about 30%, internet use is three times higher than a decade ago. Toussaint Nothias, research director at the Digital Civil Society Lab of Stanford University, who has worked extensively on Facebook, said it was “generally accepted” that Facebook had launched an “aggressive expansion” in the global south to win new users following a decline in the developed world. “Africa has a young growing population and so offers opportunities for Facebook to become an entry to the internet, via Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram or whatever. That can be monetised down the line,” he said.\nMany – but not all – academic studies have linked Covid vaccine hesitancy with misinformation circulating on social media in Africa, as elsewhere. In some parts of the continent, such as South Africa, hesitancy was the biggest challenge facing vaccination campaigns. Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO regional director for Africa, has talked of an “infodemic”, which she defines as “a glut of information with misinformation in the mix [which] makes it hard to know what is right and real”. False information circulating on social media included claims that black people cannot contract Covid-19 or that it can be cured with steam or traditional remedies such as herbal tea. Conspiracy theories describing plots by western companies or governments to test vaccines in Africa or slow demographic growth have also spread widely. “The regulation side is very problematic,” said van der Spuy. “It has not been resolved in the global north either but the risks are much bigger in the south … you don’t have the same safety net of literacy skills and ability to cross-check nor the safeguard of adequate policies or capable institutions … Facebook is investing in addressing some of these challenges, but not nearly enough.” Facebook relies on an expanding network of hundreds of third-party factcheckers across Africa to initiate investigations and respond to complaints from users. If concerns are found to be justified, warnings are attached to posts, which are also downgraded in the algorithms that direct traffic. Some accounts are taken down.\nA spokesperson for Meta, which owns Facebook, described misinformation as a complex and constantly evolving societal challenge for which there is no “silver bullet”. But, they said, Facebook now employed a global team of 40,000 working on safety and security, including 15,000 people who review content in more than 70 languages – including Amharic, Somali, Swahili and Hausa, among others. This helped the company “debunk false claims in local languages, including claims related to elections and vaccines”. “We’ve also made changes to our policies and products to ensure fewer people see false information and are made aware of it when they do, and have been highlighting reliable vaccine information through our global Covid-19 information centre,” the spokesperson said. However, posts are not usually removed unless seen as directly encouraging violence or hate, leading to concerns that some may be viewed by large audiences even after being flagged as false or misleading. “They do take things down occasionally but it takes a long time,” said Stuart Jones, director of the Centre for Analytics and Behavioural Change in South Africa, which monitors social media in the country. Facebook claims that more than 95% of the time when people see a factchecking labels, they don’t go on to view the original content. Other platforms are also struggling to contain misinformation. “Social media [in South Africa], especially Twitter, is dominated by anti-vaccine voices,” said Jones. “We’ve not identified organised networks but dealing with people with very loud voices speaking often and very passionately. The pro-vaccine voices are more moderate and don’t get the same outrage and aren’t shared as much. So the algorithms kick in and it just all runs away.”\nFrances Haugen, a former manager at Facebook turned whistleblower, has said that her concerns over an apparent lack of safety controls in non-English language markets, such as Africa and the Middle East, were a key factor in her decision to go public. “I did what I thought was necessary to save the lives of people, especially in the global south, who I think are being endangered by Facebook’s prioritisation of profits over people,” Haugen told the Guardian last year. Workers at factchecking organisations across Africa who spoke to the Guardian on condition of anonymity said they were confident their work made some difference but worried that the impact was very limited. “What we do is important and does stop some people reading stuff that simply isn’t true. But I worry that it really is just a tiny fraction of what’s out there,” one said. Some say it is difficult to judge to what extent Facebook’s downgrading of such posts in news feeds restricts exposure and worry that the company has not released a breakdown of figures for funding of factchecking operations in Africa. “There seems to be as little as possible real investment on the continent in terms of engaging people directly or hiring people with real local knowledge,” said Grace Mutung’u, a policy researcher and lawyer based in Nairobi, Kenya. “It is a matter of accountability. If you take up such a huge responsibility in society, you should equally invest in solving the problems that come out of it. They have the resources, what is lacking is the willpower.” Officials at the WHO say they are concerned about encrypted private applications such as WhatsApp, which remain “invisible”, as it is impossible to know what is being said or shared, and very difficult to intervene to stem the flow of false information. WhatsApp is also owned by Meta, which owns Facebook. The company said it was taking steps to address the problem. Nothias said that there was no easy obvious solution to the problem of content moderation, but “simple things” such as committing greater resources would help. “Currently, in comparison to the wealth of the company and its social responsibility … it is pretty minimal,” he said. “They are just not taking it seriously enough, or putting enough money into it. When you consider it really just is a question of their social responsibility against their duty to their investors, it’s not so hard to understand. They are just a corporation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T13:53:12Z'}, {'id': '625cda928f086dda4ef5eba6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has accused Russia of wanting to “destroy” the entire eastern region of Donbas, as the last remaining forces in the strategic port of Mariupol prepared to stage a final defence of the city. With missiles hitting Lviv on Monday morning and Kharkiv subject to further shelling, Moscow is pushing for a major victory in the southern city as it works to wrest control of Donbas and forge a land corridor to already-annexed Crimea. Ukraine has pledged to fight on and defend the city, defying a Russian ultimatum on Sunday that called on the remaining fighters inside the encircled Azovstal steel plant to lay down their arms and surrender. Ukrainian authorities have urged people in Donbas to move west to escape a large-scale Russian offensive to capture its composite regions of Donetsk and Luhansk.\n“Russian troops are preparing for an offensive operation in the east of our country in the near future. They want to literally finish off and destroy Donbas,” Zelenskiy said in an evening statement, in which he repeated a plea for foreign governments to send weapons for his troops. Mariupol has become a symbol of Ukraine’s unexpectedly fierce resistance since Russian troops invaded the former Soviet state on 24 February.\n“The city still has not fallen,” the prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said on Sunday. “There’s still our military forces, our soldiers. So they will fight to the end,” he told ABC’s This Week. “We will not surrender.” While several large cities were under siege, he said, not one – with the exception of Kherson in the south – had fallen, and more than 900 towns and cities had been recaptured. Following Ukrainian fighters’ refusal to surrender Mariupol, Russian troops will reportedly close the city for entry and exit on Monday and issue “movement passes” to those who remain, an adviser to the mayor has said. Petro Andriushchenko made the claim in an update over the Telegram messaging app on Sunday, sharing a photo that appeared to show a line of people waiting for passes. The governor of Luhansk, Sergiy Gaiday, said the coming week would be “difficult”. “It may be the last time we have a chance to save you,” he wrote on Facebook.\nRussian forces continued to shell the eastern Luhansk region and two people died in the town of Zolote, Gaiday told Ukrainian media earlier in the day. Two people also died and four were wounded in attacks on the towns of Marinka and Novopol, west of Donetsk, the regional governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Telegram. An air strike hit an armaments factory in the capital, Kyiv. Five missiles reportedly struck Lviv on Monday morning, according to the city’s mayor, adding that authorities were seeking more detailed information. In Ukraine’s second city of Kharkiv, at least five people were killed and 20 wounded in a series of strikes 21km (13 miles) from the Russian border. Maksym Khaustov, the head of the Kharkiv region’s health department, confirmed the deaths there following a series of strikes that journalists on the scene said had ignited fires throughout the city and torn roofs from buildings. “The whole home rumbled and trembled,” 71-year-old Svitlana Pelelygina told Agence France-Presse as she surveyed her wrecked apartment. “Everything here began to burn.” “I called the firefighters. They said: ‘We are on our way but we were also being shelled.’” Meanwhile, Ukraine has completed a questionnaire that will form a starting point for the European Union to decide on its membership. “Today, I can say that the document has been completed by the Ukrainian side,” Ihor Zhovkva, the deputy head of Zelenskiy’s office, told the Ukrainian public broadcaster on Sunday. The European Commission would need to issue a recommendation on Ukraine’s compliance with the necessary membership criteria, he added. “We expect the recommendation … to be positive, and then the ball will be on the side of the EU member states.” Zhovkva said Ukraine expected to acquire the status of a candidate country for EU accession in June during a scheduled meeting of the European Council meeting.\nResidents of the Luhansk region in eastern Ukraine have been urged to evacuate immediately. The head of the region’s military administration, Sergei Gaidai, maintained that the “decision is yours” but warned that the cemetery was “getting bigger by the day”. “Next week may be difficult. [This] may be the last time we still have a chance to save you,” he said in a statement late on Sunday. In the city of Kramatorsk, also in the east, Orthodox Palm Sunday granted its residents some respite before the expected Russian onslaught. In the Orthodox Svyato-Pokrovsky church, about 40 people – mostly women wearing colourful headscarves – attended the service. “It’s very hard and scary right now,” a congregant said as she arrived at the red-brick church topped with four gleaming domes. One young mother, Nadia, said she refused to be evacuated for fear of travelling alone with her two children and leaving her relatives in Kramatorsk. “We don’t go to the basement each time there’s a [bomb] siren. It’s too stressful for them [the children],” she said. “We have our spot in the basement just in case, but we prefer to stay in the house if possible. We dim the lights.” The Ukrainian deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk has urged Russian forces to let residents flee besieged Mariupol, saying that humanitarian corridors allowing civilians to escape would not open on Sunday after failing to agree terms with Moscow forces. The UN World Food Programme says more than 100,000 civilians in Mariupol are on the verge of famine and lack water and heating. Ukraine’s minister of digital transformation, Mykhailo Fedorov, said the city was on “the verge of a humanitarian catastrophe”, adding there was compiling evidence of alleged Russian atrocities there. “We will hand everything over to The Hague. There will be no impunity.”\nThe mayor of Bucha – a town near Kyiv where the discovery of dead civilians sparked international condemnation and war crimes accusations – said Russian troops had raped men as well as women and children there. Zelensky said he had invited his French counterpart to visit Ukraine to see for himself evidence that Russian forces have committed “genocide” – a term president Emmanuel Macron has avoided. “I talked to him yesterday,” Zelensky told CNN in an interview recorded on Friday but broadcast on Sunday. “I just told him I want him to understand that this is not war, but nothing other than genocide. I invited him to come when he will have the opportunity. He’ll come and see, and I’m sure he will understand.” But Russia has warned the US of “unpredictable consequences” if it sent its “most sensitive” weapons systems to Ukraine. Its defence ministry claimed on Saturday to have shot down a Ukrainian transport plane in the Odessa region carrying weapons supplied by western nations. On Sunday, spokesman Igor Konashenkov said Russian missiles had destroyed ammunition, fuel and lubricant depots in eastern Ukraine and 44 Ukrainian military facilities, including command posts. He said Russian air defence systems shot down two Ukrainian MiG-29 aircraft in the Kharkiv region and a drone near the city of Pavlograd.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T09:59:20Z'}, {'id': '625ce1d48f086dda4ef5ebc1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thank you for following today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. We have moved to a new liveblog in the link below where you can continue to keep up the date with the latest developments.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T04:15:46Z'}, {'id': '625ce0388f08790595e285a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has called for more weapons, describing “every delay” as “permission for Russia to take the lives of Ukrainians”. In his latest address, he appealed to countries to send arms, saying Ukraine’s fate “depends upon them”. Zelenskiy also claimed in the address that the regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in Ukraine’s south were being transferred to “the ruble zone” and subordinated to Russian administration. The Ukrainian president said Russia’s actions in the territories were following the example of the so-called separatist republics of the DPR and LPR. Ukraine has completed a questionnaire which will form a starting point for the European Union to decide on its membership. “Today, I can say that the document has been completed by the Ukrainian side,” Ihor Zhovkva, deputy head of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office, told the Ukrainian public broadcaster on Sunday evening. “We expect the recommendation ... to be positive, and then the ball will be on the side of the EU member states.” Ukraine has vowed that its forces will “fight to the end” in the besieged port city of Mariupol, after a Russian ultimatum for the remaining Ukrainian troops there to surrender expired. A second British soldier fighting with the Ukrainian army was paraded on Russian television after being captured in Mariupol. Shaun Pinner, 48, said he had been fighting alongside Ukrainian marines when Vladimir Putin’s forces invaded nearly eight weeks ago. A fresh series of Russian airstrikes came as a reminder this weekend that the war in the Ukrainian capital is far from over, despite signs of more normal life returning to the streets in recent days. An unverified photo claiming to show the Russian warship Moskva moments after it was reportedly hit by a Ukrainian Neptune missile has surfaced online. The source of the image is unclear and the Guardian has not been able to immediately verify its authenticity. Zelenskiy said he has invited French President Emmanuel Macron to visit Ukraine to see for himself evidence that Russian forces have committed “genocide”, a term Macron has avoided using. Earlier on Sunday Zelenskiy urged US president Joe Biden to visit Ukraine and reiterated that he is not willing to cede territory in the country’s east to end war with Russia. Zelenskiy said he was “hopeful” Biden would make the trip. The president of the European Commission has urged member states to supply Ukraine with weapons systems “quickly” and suggested that a next round of EU sanctions could target Russia’s powerful Sberbank. The International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, said she had a “very good call” with Ukraine’s president. She added: “Continued economic support by Ukraine’s partners is essential to lay the foundations for rebuilding a modern competitive Ukraine.” The United Nations refugee agency said 4,869,019 Ukrainians had left the country since Russia invaded in February – up 32,574 from Saturday’s total, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees chief, Filippo Grandi’s, said on Sunday. Oleg Synegubov, head of the Kharkiv regional administration, said Ukrainian forces were successfully pushing the Russians back to the east of the city and that several villages were liberated. At least two people were killed and four injured on Sunday in the shelling of the eastern Ukrainian town of Zolote, the local governor said. Zelenskiy maintained Ukraine is not willing to give up territory in the east in order to end the war with Russia and acknowledged that the battle could influence the entire course of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T03:51:29Z'}, {'id': '625cccf18f08a3f8f35ecd6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images to drop on our newswires from Ukraine today. In Kharkiv, a destroyed shop can be seen after the centre of the city was hit by Russian artillery strikes, killing five and injuring 13. In the city of Borodianka, northwest of the Ukrainian capital Kyiv, a Ukrainian flag flaps in the wind beside a damaged residential area.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T02:48:21Z'}, {'id': '625cc7728f08790595e2854f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We have a little more detail on Ukraine’s completion of a questionnaire which will form a starting point for the European Union to decide on its membership. “Today, I can say that the document has been completed by the Ukrainian side,” Ihor Zhovkva, deputy head of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office, told the Ukrainian public broadcaster on Sunday evening. The European Commission will need to issue a recommendation on Ukraine’s compliance with the necessary membership criteria, he added. “We expect the recommendation ... to be positive, and then the ball will be on the side of the EU member states.” Zhovkva added that Ukraine expects to acquire the status of a candidate country for EU accession in June during a scheduled meeting of the European Council meeting. The European Council is to meet June 23-24th, according to the Council’s schedule on its website. “Next, we will need to start accession talks. And once we hold those talks, we can already talk about Ukraine’s full membership in the EU,” Zhovkva said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T02:25:59Z'}, {'id': '625cc3028f08a3f8f35ecd4b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Protests against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine continued over the weekend. In Paris, France, demonstrators rallied at the Place de la Republique carrying placards, Ukrainian flags and sunflowers.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T01:49:39Z'}, {'id': '625cc27b8f08a3f8f35ecd4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Zelenskiy also warned of an incoming offensive by Russian forces in the eastern part of Ukraine, during a video address on Sunday. “Russian troops are preparing for an offensive operation in the east of our country. It will begin in the near future,” he said. “They want to literally finish off and destroy Donbas. Destroy everything that once gave glory to this industrial region. Just as the Russian troops are destroying Mariupol, they want to wipe out other cities and communities in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T01:46:29Z'}, {'id': '625cb7e68f08a3f8f35ecd17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Zelenskiy maintained Ukraine is not willing to give up territory in the east in order to end the war with Russia and acknowledged that the battle could influence the entire course of the war. “This is why it is very important for us to not allow them, to stand our ground, because this battle ... it can influence the course of the whole war,” Zelensky said in an interview with CNN. He added that by capturing the Donbas, Russian forces may try again to seize Kyiv. “That is why we understand that the fact that we fought them off and they left, and they were running away from Kyiv - from the north, from Chernihiv and from that direction - it doesn’t mean if they are able to capture Donbas, they won’t come further towards Kyiv.” The president said that he’s prepared to engage with Russia diplomatically to try to end the war. “If there is an opportunity to speak, we’ll speak. But to speak only under a Russian ultimatum? It’s then a question about attitude towards us, not about whether the dialogue is ‘good’ or ‘bad.’ It’s impossible.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T01:06:48Z'}, {'id': '625ca8288f086dda4ef5eac2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he has invited French President Emmanuel Macron to visit Ukraine to see for himself evidence that Russian forces have committed “genocide,” a term Macron has avoided using. “I talked to him yesterday,” Zelenskiy told CNN in an interview recorded on Friday but broadcast on Sunday. “I just told him I want him to understand that this is not war, but nothing other than genocide. I invited him to come when he will have the opportunity. He’ll come and see, and I’m sure he will understand.” The Ukrainian leader said he believed Macron was shying away from using the term “genocide” because he thinks it would hurt the chances for diplomatic engagement with Russia. Zelenskiy said earlier that Macron’s refusal to use the term was “very painful for us.” Macron told France’s Radio Bleu on Thursday that it was not helpful to Ukraine “to enter into verbal escalations without drawing all of the conclusions.” “The word ‘genocide’ has a meaning” and “needs to be characterised legally, not by politicians.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T00:40:46Z'}, {'id': '625cab398f086dda4ef5eac9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An unverified photo claiming to show the Russian warship Moskva moments after it was reportedly hit by a Ukrainian Neptune missile has surfaced online. The source of the image is unclear, and the Guardian has not been able to immediately verify its authenticity. The Guardian’s Moscow correspondent, Andrew Roth, said he believes the unverified photo may be the first of the Moskva cruiser to emerge after it was reportedly struck by a missile. Rob Lee, a PhD student at the Department of War Studies at King’s College London, tweeted: “Looks like a legit photo of the Moskva after it was struck by Ukrainian Neptun[e] anti-ship missiles.” OSINTtechnical, an account that shares open-source intelligence information, wrote: “I can’t verify the authenticity, but this is a Slava class cruiser and I don’t think any of them have been destroyed in this manner.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T00:21:36Z'}, {'id': '625ca4e18f086dda4ef5eab7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in Ukraine’s south are being transferred to “the ruble zone” and subordinated to Russian administration, Zelenskiy claimed in his latest address. The Ukrainian president said Russia’s actions in the territories are following the example of the so-called separatist republics of the DPR and LPR. The occupiers are also trying to tear off the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions, following the example of the so-called DPR and LPR. This territory is being transferred to the ruble zone and subordinated to the administrative machine of Russia.” The answer to the attempted “ruble occupation” of the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions must be full coverage of the Russian banking and financial systems by sanctions, Zelenskiy added. Speaking to Ukrainians directly, he urged residents in the regions to resist Russian orders. Sabotage the orders of the occupiers. Do not cooperate with them. Protest. It is necessary to hold on so that Russia does not manage to distort life in other cities of Ukraine, like it did in Donetsk and Luhansk.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T23:48:49Z'}, {'id': '625ca3288f086dda4ef5eaaf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Zelenskiy called for more weapons, describing “every delay” as “permission for Russia to take the lives of Ukrainians”. We are doing everything to ensure defence. We are in constant contact with partners. We are grateful to those who really help with everything they can. But those who have the weapons and ammunition we need and delay their provision must know that the fate of this battle also depends on them. The fate of people who can be saved. The 53rd day of the war is over, and we have been waiting for answers to some points in our weapons inquiries for 53 days. And some answers are formulated so that delivery can begin only in May. I speak directly in such cases: every delay in weapons, every political delay is a permission for Russia to take the lives of Ukrainians. This is how Russia interprets it. That should not be the case in reality.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T23:56:59Z'}, {'id': '625ca1c48f086dda4ef5eaaa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Eighteen people have been killed and more than 100 wounded in shelling in the past four days in the northeast Ukrainian city of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said late on Sunday. On Sunday, five people were killed and 20 were injured when a missile and artillery fire hit the city centre and the Saltivka suburb, regional governor Oleh Synyehubov said earlier. Zelenskiy said in his nightly address that Russia’s shelling on Kharkiv has been constant. Constant shelling of our city of Kharkiv continues.... As of this moment, the list of dead from this strike includes five Kharkiv residents and at least 15 wounded. In the last four days alone, 18 people have been killed and 106 have been wounded by the Russian shelling of Kharkiv. This is nothing but deliberate terror. Mortars, artillery against ordinary residential neighbourhoods, against ordinary civilians.” Synyehubov said Ukraine’s armed forces had successfully engaged in counter-attacks in the Kharkiv region, recapturing two villages fully and another partially.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T23:28:00Z'}, {'id': '625c944c8f086dda4ef5ea7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, urged US president Joe Biden to visit Ukraine and reiterated that he is not willing to cede territory in the country’s east to end war with Russia. A second British soldier fighting with the Ukrainian army was paraded on Russian television after being captured in the besieged city of Mariupol. Ukraine has vowed that its forces will “fight to the end” in the besieged port city of Mariupol, after a Russian ultimatum for the remaining Ukrainian troops there to surrender expired. While life seemed to be slowly returning to the streets of Kyiv, a fresh series of Russian airstrikes came as a reminder this weekend that the war in the Ukrainian capital is far from over. The president of the European Commission has urged member states to supply Ukraine with weapons systems “quickly” and suggested that a next round of EU sanctions could target Russia’s powerful Sberbank. Oleg Synegubov, head of the Kharkiv regional administration, said that the Ukrainian forces were successfully pushing the Russians back to the east of the city and that several villages were liberated. At least two people were killed and four injured on Sunday in the shelling of the eastern Ukrainian town of Zolote, the local governor said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T22:49:20Z'}, {'id': '625c96a48f08a3f8f35ecc94', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, said she had a “very good call” with Ukraine’s president, adding, “Continued economic support by Ukraine’s partners is essential to lay the foundations for rebuilding a modern competitive Ukraine”\nUkrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he had discussed with Georgieva the “issue of ensuring Ukraine’s financial stability and preparations for post-war reconstruction”. Earlier this week, the IMF said, “We are preparing for the massive reconstruction effort that will be required.” And Georgieva has previously warned that the war could derail the global economic recovery from the Covid crisis.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T00:54:21Z'}, {'id': '625c8dce8f08790595e28475', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An adviser to the mayor of Mariupol claimed that the city would be closed for entry and exit on Monday and warned that those who remain in the city would be “filtered out”, according to CNN, which said it could not independently verify the claims of the advisor on Telegram. Petro Andriushchenko, the mayor’s adviser, said Russian forces had begun issuing passes for movement within the city and posted a photo that allegedly showed residents lining up for the passes, CNN said. Andriushchenko said: Hundreds of citizens have to stand in a line to get a pass, without which it will be impossible not only to move between the districts of the city, but also to go out on the streets starting next week.” CNN noted that Andriushchenko is not currently in Mariupol, but gathers information from people on the ground in the city. The AP reported earlier that some Ukrainian fighters have ignored a surrender-or-die ultimatum from the Russians on Sunday and were holding out against the capture of the vital port.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T22:14:37Z'}, {'id': '625c88488f08790595e28464', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations refugee agency said 4,869,019 Ukrainians had left the country since Russia invaded in February – up 32,574 from Saturday’s total, the AFP reported, citing United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees chief Filippo Grandi’s remarks on Sunday: As Christians celebrate resurrection on this sombre Easter Sunday, we must stubbornly hope that in the days, months and years to come the methods and language of war will not prevail over those – more difficult, more complicated – that lead to peace. In addition to the 4.9m Ukrainians who have fled, an additional 215,000 students and migrant workers (who are citizens of other nations) have also left Ukraine since the start of the war, the UN has said. Some additional statistics on the refugee crisis from the UN, via the AFP’s latest report: Nearly two-thirds of all Ukrainian children have been forced from their homes, including those who remain in Ukraine. Nearly six out of 10 Ukrainian refugees, or 2.76 million, have entered Poland. A total of 738,862 Ukrainians entered Romania, many of whom crossed over from Moldova. Another 484,725 refugees have ended up in Russia. A total of 458,654 Ukrainians have entered Hungary. The UN’s international office for migration estimates that 7.1 million people have left their homes but remain in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T22:22:33Z'}, {'id': '625c82a88f08a3f8f35ecc4c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The office of Ukranian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy reported that Ukraine has filled out a questionnaire in its effort to join the European Union:\nAnton Gerashchenko, an adviser for the Ukrainian Ministry of Internal Affairs, also shared the news on Telegram, and quoted Ihor Zhovkva, the deputy head of the Ukrainian president’s office, as saying that now “the ball will be in the court of the European Commission”, the Washington Post reported. Earlier this month, Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said she welcomed Ukraine’s bid and that the questionnaire would be the first step in the process, telling Zelenskiy: “We are with you as you dream of Europe … Ukraine belongs in the European family,” the Post noted. That process could be lengthy, but Von der Leyen said at the time: “It will not as usual be a matter of years to form this opinion but I think a matter of weeks.” An earlier report from her visit:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T22:17:44Z'}, {'id': '625c7c7c8f08790595e2843e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleg Synegubov, head of the Kharkiv regional administration, said that the Ukrainian forces were successfully pushing the Russians back to the east of the city and claimed that several villages had been liberated, CNN reported, citing his Telegram posts.\nThe Guardian has not been able to independently confirm the reports of liberated villages. Kharkiv continued to endure heavy shelling on Sunday, according to Synegubov’s post, CNN reported: Today, in broad daylight, there were shellings of the central part of the city, the residential area of Saltivka from MLRS [multiple rocket systems] and artillery. Unfortunately, 20 people were injured, five people were killed. Apartment buildings and other civilian infrastructure were damaged.” The State Emergency Services also reported that 18 addresses in Kharkiv had been hit, and that apartments in a five-story building were set ablaze, CNN said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T22:32:07Z'}, {'id': '625c71c08f08a3f8f35ecc08', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian fighters holed up in a steel plant in the last known pocket of resistance inside the shattered city of Mariupol ignored a surrender-or-die ultimatum from the Russians on Sunday and held out against the capture of the strategically vital port, according to a new AP dispatch.\nFrom reporters Adam Schreck and Mstylav Chernov. The fall of Mariupol, the site of a merciless, seven-week-old siege that has reduced much of the city to a smoking ruin, would be Moscow’s biggest victory of the war yet and free up troops to take part in a potentially climactic battle for control of Ukraine’s industrial east. As its missiles and rockets slammed into other parts of the country, Russia estimated 2,500 Ukrainian troops and about 400 foreign mercenaries were dug in at the hulking Azovstal steel mill, which covers more than 11 square kilometers (4 square miles) and is laced with tunnels. Moscow gave the defenders a midday deadline to surrender, saying those who laid down their arms were “guaranteed to keep their lives”. The Ukrainians rejected it, just as they did with previous ultimatums. “All those who will continue resistance will be destroyed,” Maj Gen Igor Konashenkov, the Russian Defense Ministry’s spokesman, said in announcing the latest ultimatum. Ukrainian Deputy Defense Minister Hanna Malyar described Mariupol as a “shield defending Ukraine” as Russian troops prepare for battle in the mostly Russian-speaking Donbas, where Moscow-backed separatists already control some territory. Russian forces, meanwhile, carried out aerial attacks near Kyiv and elsewhere in an apparent effort to weaken Ukraine’s military capacity ahead of the anticipated assault. Russia said Sunday that it had attacked an ammunition plant near Kyiv overnight with precision-guided missiles, the third such strike in as many days. Explosions were also reported overnight in Kramatorsk, the eastern city where rockets earlier this month killed at least 57 people at a train station crowded with civilians trying to evacuate ahead of the Russian offensive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T20:14:03Z'}, {'id': '625c6dc28f08a3f8f35ecbed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he had discussed with the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, the “issue of ensuring Ukraine’s financial stability and preparations for post-war reconstruction”. Zelenskiy tweeted late Sunday evening that “we have clear plans” and that cooperation between the IMF and Ukraine will continue to be fruitful:\nEarlier this week, the IMF said, “We are preparing for the massive reconstruction effort that will be required.” And Georgieva has previously warned that the war could derail the global economic recovery from Covid-19:\nFor further reading:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T19:49:06Z'}, {'id': '625c68b18f08a3f8f35ecbd0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest photos from Mariupol where the remaining Ukrainian forces were still fighting on Sunday in defiance of a Russian demand that they surrender, according to the prime minister of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T19:34:30Z'}, {'id': '625c60b78f08790595e283ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU is allocating an additional €50m in humanitarian funding to support those affected by Russia’s invasion, including €45m for humanitarian projects in Ukraine and €5m for Moldova, the European Commission announced in a statement Sunday: As heavy fighting and missile strikes continue to destroy critical civilian infrastructure, humanitarian needs in Ukraine remain extremely high. Despite access and security constraints, EU humanitarian partners are providing assistance to vulnerable people in different regions of Ukraine. The EU is allocating a further €50m in humanitarian funding to support the people affected by Russia’s war on Ukraine, including €45m for humanitarian projects in Ukraine and €5m for Moldova. This brings the EU’s total humanitarian aid funding in response to the war to €143m. This funding is part of the €1bn support package pledged by the European Commission at last week’s global pledging event ‘Stand Up For Ukraine’. This new funding will address the most pressing humanitarian needs by providing emergency medical services, access to safe drinking water and hygiene, shelter and protection, cash assistance, and support against gender-based violence. Earlier, the president of the European Commission urged member states to supply Ukraine with weapons systems urgently and suggested that new EU sanctions could target Russia’s Sberbank. “It applies to all member states: those who can should deliver quickly, because only that way Ukraine can survive in its acute defensive battle against Russia,” Ursula von der Leyen told Germany’s Bild am Sonntag newspaper.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T19:25:50Z'}, {'id': '625c5b368f086dda4ef5e9b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'GES-2, a vast new arts centre that was supposed to be Moscow’s answer to Tate Modern, is now home to empty galleries as artists have removed their works in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, according to a new report from my colleagues Pjotr Sauer and Andrew Roth:\nAt the end of last year Vladimir Putin toured the GES-2 museum alongside Leonid Mikhelson, one of the country’s richest businessmen, who financed the multimillion dollar construction of the centre. Cameras followed Putin as he watched over the work of the Icelandic artist Ragnar Kjartansson, who inaugurated the much-anticipated GES-2 with Santa Barbara – A Living Sculpture, a theatrical piece that examined the relationship between Russia and the US. Few places now seem to epitomise Russia’s cultural decoupling from the west better than the large, empty walls of GES-2, created as Moscow’s answer to Tate Modern. “We need to end this illusion that things will get back to how they were before the war. Drinking cocktails at art openings as people are being killed feels criminal,” said Evgeny Antufiev, a Russian artist who asked for his works to be removed from GES-2 shortly after Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February. Full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T18:32:43Z'}, {'id': '625c54a78f086dda4ef5e983', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Aid workers are struggling to care for elderly people in Ukraine, who are suffering from extreme traumas and physical ailments, according to this new AFP report:\nVladimir Lignov, 71, who lost a limb, is now at a Dnipro maternity hospital, which was opened up for people fleeing. He told AFP: I don’t understand what’s going on. Maybe it’s better if I just go to the graveyard. I don’t want to go on living. Aleksandra Vasiltchenko, 80, said she spent weeks alone in her apartment before she escaped: I was hiding all the time in the bathroom. I was constantly crying. I was imprisoned in my own flat. Yulia Panfiorova, 83, is a former economics professor. She told AFP: This is my third war [referring first to the second world war, then the outbreak of fighting in 2014 between the Ukrainian army and pro-Kremlin separatists]. Lysychansk was freed from the Nazis in 1943. I remember how we returned home. Of course I have some memories about it. They were Nazis. Then our country was invaded, and now our country has been invaded by a foreign state. Then the freedom of our state was at threat. Now it is the same. Olga Volkova, the volunteer director of a centre housing 84 residents, mostly elderly people, told the news agency: The hardest are the people who spent long stretches in cellars ... A lot of people were left on their own. We helped them before the war, but then they were left to fend for themselves.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T18:16:37Z'}, {'id': '625c51aa8f08a3f8f35ecb3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US president, Joe Biden, has said he is praying on Easter for “those who have lost loved ones and those among us living in the dark shadow of war, persecution, and poverty”. Earlier today, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, urged Biden to visit Ukraine, telling CNN: “I think he will ... But it’s his decision, of course, and [it] depends on the safety situation, of course. But I think he’s the leader of the United States and that’s why he should come here to see.” Biden said earlier this week that the US would decide soon whether to send a senior official to Ukraine as a show of support.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T18:16:59Z'}, {'id': '625c4f678f08a3f8f35ecb33', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian troops are “gradually withdrawing” from the Borivs’kyi district in Ukraine’s Kharkiv region, according to a Borova village council statement released Sunday and reported by CNN. The statement said: There is no mobile connection and no Internet, which are impossible to restore as the territory is occupied by the Russians ... some places are left without electricity and gas.” The Russian forces have taken complete control of the district, with troops housed in the village council properties, the Palace of Culture, hospitals and civilians’ homes, the statement said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T17:38:52Z'}, {'id': '625c47ef8f08790595e2831c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is Sam Levin taking over our live coverage for the next few hours. Here is more from Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, who told CBS he anticipated “desperate attempts of the Russian forces to finish with Mariupol at any cost”.\nHe said Mariupol “doesn’t exist anymore”: The situation in Mariupol is both dire militarily and heartbreaking. The city doesn’t exist anymore. The remainings of the Ukrainian army and large group of civilians are basically encircled by the Russian forces. They continue their struggle, but it seems from the way the Russian army behaves in Mariupol, they decided to raze the city to the ground at any cost.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T17:12:59Z'}, {'id': '625c3a0b8f08790595e282b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The teenage daughter of a Ukrainian paramedic who had been due to take part in the Invictus Games but was captured by Russian soldiers has called for her release. Yuliia Paievska, 52, is the founder of Taira’s Angels, a medical evacuation unit that rescues war casualties. It had worked in Mariupol, helping soldiers and residents. Paievska was due to be part of Ukraine’s archery and swimming teams. Her daughter, Anna-Sofia Puzanova, told PA Media: “My mum was captured by Russian soldiers near Mariupol on 16 March, one month ago already. “And now she’s probably in Russia. To be honest I don’t know exactly where she is because we don’t have any contact with her.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T16:43:19Z'}, {'id': '625c2fff8f086dda4ef5e842', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Associated Press’ Cara Anna and Emilio Morenatti have filed this despatch from villages on the outskirts of Kyiv, where hastily buried bodies are being dug up as part of investigations into war crimes. On a quiet street lined with walnut trees was a cemetery with four bodies that hadn’t yet found a home. All were victims of Russian soldiers in this village outside Kyiv. Their temporary caskets were together in a grave. Volunteers dug them up one by one on Sunday – two weeks after the soldiers disappeared. This spring is a grim season of planting and replanting in towns and villages around Kyiv. Bodies given hurried graves amid the Russian occupation are now being retrieved for investigations into possible war crimes. More than 900 civilian victims have been found so far. All four bodies here were killed on the same street, on the same day. The volunteers tried digging with shovels, then gave up and called an excavator. It arrived, rumbling past the cemetery’s wooden outhouse. Soon there was the smell of fresh earth, and the murmur, “There they are.” A woman appeared, crying. Ira Slepchenko was the wife of one man buried here. No one told her he was being dug up now. The wife of another victim arrived. Valya Naumenko peered into the grave, then hugged Ira. “Don’t collapse,” she said. “I need you to be OK.” The two couples lived next to each other. On the final day before the Russians left the village, soldiers knocked at one home. Valya’s husband, Pavlo Ivanyuk, opened the door. The soldiers took him to the garage and shot him in the head, apparently without any explanation. Then the soldiers shouted, “Is anyone else here?” Ira’s husband, Sasha Nedolezhko, heard the gunshot. But he thought the soldiers would search the homes if no one answered. He opened the door and the soldiers shot him too. In the house next to the cemetery, 66-year-old Valya Voronets cooked homegrown potatoes in a wood-warmed room, still getting by without water, electricity or gas. A Russian soldier once came running and pointed his gun at her husband after spotting him climbing onto the roof to get a cellphone signal. “Are you going to kill an old man?” 65-year-old Myhailo Scherbakov replied. Not all the Russians were like that. Voronets said she cried together with another soldier, barely 21. “You’re too young,” she told him. Another soldier told her they didn’t want to fight. Still, she feared them all. But she offered them milk from her only cow. “I felt sorry for them in these conditions,” she said. “And if you’re nice to them, maybe they won’t kill you.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T15:35:35Z'}, {'id': '625c2f278f086dda4ef5e832', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged the US president, Joe Biden, to visit Ukraine and reiterated that he is not willing to cede territory in the country’s east to end war with Russia. “I think he will,” Zelenskiy said in an extended interview with CNN when asked if he was aware of any plans for a US presidential visit. “But it’s his decision, of course, and [it] depends on the safety situation, of course. But I think he’s the leader of the United States and that’s why he should come here to see.” Biden told reporters on Thursday that the US would decide soon whether to send a senior official to Ukraine as a show of support, but sources suggested to Reuters the administration was considering defense secretary Lloyd Austin or secretary of state Antony Blinken. The Zelenskiy comments came after UK prime minister Boris Johnson made a surprise visit to Kyiv last weekend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T15:29:17Z'}, {'id': '625c2ca58f086dda4ef5e80c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has said there has not been any recent diplomatic communications between Russia and his country. Kuleba said that the two countries’ foreign ministries had not formally spoken, and that the situation in Mariupol might provide a block to negotiations. He told CBS News in an interview: “Mariupol may be a red line.” Earlier on Sunday, the Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said Ukraine’s forces continued to fight on in Mariupol and had not surrendered, despite Russian demands.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T17:07:17Z'}, {'id': '625c29818f08a3f8f35ec9da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is 6pm. Here is a round-up of today’s main headlines: Remaining Ukrainian forces in the southern port of Mariupol are still fighting and continue to defy a Russian demand that they surrender, the Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said on Sunday. The president of the European Commission has urged member states to supply Ukraine with weapons systems “quickly” and suggested that a next round of EU sanctions could target Russia’s powerful Sberbank and include an embargo on Russian oil. A Ukrainian health official says that at least five people have been killed in the Russian shelling of Kharkiv. Maksym Haustov, the head of the Kharkiv regional administration’s health department, said that another 13 residents were wounded by Sunday’s shelling of Ukraine’s second-largest city. At least two people were killed and four have been injured on Sunday in the shelling of the eastern Ukrainian town of Zolote, the local governor said. “In one of the high-rise buildings, two floors were destroyed ... We have at least two dead citizens, four more wounded,” said Serhiy Gaidai, the governor of Luhansk. Ukraine and Russia have failed to agree on Sunday about humanitarian convoys for the evacuation of civilians from war-affected areas, according to Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk. Another missile attack in the early hours of Sunday damaged infrastructure in the city of Brovary, near Kyiv, Igor Sapozhko, the mayor of Brovary, said in an online post. Russian armed forces destroyed an ammunition factory near Kyiv, Russian defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov said on Sunday. Many of the nearly 5 million people who have fled Ukraine will not have homes to return to, the United Nations warned. Ukraine has asked G7 nations for $50bn in financial support and is also considering issuing 0% coupon bonds to help it cover a war-linked budget deficit over the next six months, the president’s economic adviser Oleh Ustenko said on Sunday. Russia says it is “concerned” about increased activity of Nato forces in the Arctic and sees risks of “unintended incidents” occurring in the region, Reuters reports. Pope Francis, marking an “Easter of war,” on Sunday urged leaders to hear the people’s plea for peace in Ukraine and implicitly criticised Russia for dragging the country into a “cruel and senseless” conflict. Christ’s message that good will triumph over evil will resonate even more this year amid the backdrop of the war in Ukraine, Boris Johnson has said. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. My colleague Harry Taylor will be along shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T15:30:09Z'}, {'id': '625c250b8f08a3f8f35ec9ac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson delivered a special message on Sunday to Ukrainian Christians, telling them to be strong and have courage in their hearts, as he wished Christians around the world a happy Easter. His message comes as tensions in the port area of Mariupol remain high.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T14:33:24Z'}, {'id': '625c22188f08790595e281bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian health official says that at least five people have been killed in the Russian shelling of Kharkiv. Maksym Haustov, the head of the Kharkiv regional administration’s health department, said that another 13 residents were wounded by Sunday’s shelling of Ukraine’s second-largest city. Rescuers have been working to help survivors after the shelling that hit residential and administrative buildings and caused fires. Officials said the centre of Kharkiv came under shelling by multiple rocket launchers, the Associated Press reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T14:28:20Z'}, {'id': '625c19058f08a3f8f35ec937', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Duke and Duchess of Sussex said everyone was ‘standing with’ the Ukraine team at the Invictus Games during a speech at the opening ceremony in the Netherlands. The couple paid tribute to the bravery of team Ukraine and acknowledged their physical and emotional struggle to even get to the competition.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T13:56:04Z'}, {'id': '625c189a8f08790595e28161', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Remaining Ukrainian forces in the southern port of Mariupol are still fighting and continue to defy a Russian demand that they surrender, the Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said on Sunday. “The city still has not fallen,” Shmyhal told ABC’s This Week programme, adding that Ukrainian soldiers continued to control some parts of the city. Shmyhal said that he would attend the International Monetary Fund and World Bank meetings in Washington this week and seek more financial assistance for Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T13:56:53Z'}, {'id': '625c185b8f08790595e2815f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least two people were killed and four have been injured on Sunday in the shelling of the eastern Ukrainian town of Zolote, the local governor said. “In one of the high-rise buildings, two floors were destroyed ... We have at least two dead citizens, four more wounded,” said Serhiy Gaidai, the governor of the Luhansk region. Reuters could not immediately verify his remarks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T13:39:27Z'}, {'id': '625c090d8f08790595e280d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Shoppers are being warned that the cost of a new sofa and other furniture is to rise as the Russia-Ukraine war pushes up the cost of key materials such as timber. “We have never seen anything like this in terms of across-the-board price increases for materials,” said Sean Holt, the managing director of the British Furniture Manufacturers, the industry’s trade body. “It is putting a lot of pressure on manufacturing in the UK and that will have to be shared with retailers and consumers.” Higher furniture prices are already feeding into higher living costs in the UK. Inflation is running at 7%, the highest level in three decades, with furniture prices up 17%. The invasion of Ukraine is heaping more pressure on British furniture makers who had been sourcing timber from Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T13:03:31Z'}, {'id': '625bfc6c8f086dda4ef5e65f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Christ’s message that good will triumph over evil will resonate even more this year amid the backdrop of the war in Ukraine, Boris Johnson has said. Delivering his Easter message in a video on Twitter, the UK prime minister paid tribute to “the Christians of Ukraine, whether they’re marking Easter today, or its orthodox equivalent later this month, for whom Christ’s message of hope, the triumph of life over death and good over evil, will resonate this year, perhaps more than any other”. Speaking in Ukrainian, and referencing a Psalm, he said: “Be strong and have courage in your heart, you all who trust in the Lord.” Johnson said: Easter tells us that there is light beyond the darkness, that beyond the suffering lies redemption.\nMeanwhile, the archbishop of Canterbury also referenced the conflict in his Easter sermon. Justin Welby said: Ukrainians have woken up to the end of the world as they knew it. Now they are awakened by the noises of war, and the sickening reality of terror. They wake up to mortal fear. Let this be a time for Russian ceasefire, withdrawal and a commitment to talks. This is a time for resetting the ways of peace, not for what Bismarck called blood and iron. Let Christ prevail. Let the darkness of war be banished.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T12:58:00Z'}, {'id': '625bf2ec8f08790595e28035', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia says it is “concerned” about increased activity of Nato forces in the Arctic and sees risks of “unintended incidents” occurring in the region, Reuters reports. The news agency cited the TASS news agency, which carried quotes from Russian ambassador-at-large Nikolai Korchunov on Sunday. “The recent increase in Nato’s activity in the Arctic is a cause for concern. Another large-scale military exercise of the alliance was recently held in northern Norway. In our view, this does not contribute to the security of the region,” Korchunov said. According to Korchunov, such activity raises the risk of “unintended incidents”, which, in addition to security risks, can also cause serious damage to the Arctic ecosystem. He did not specify what type of incident he might be referring to.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T11:01:24Z'}, {'id': '625be9bb8f08790595e28012', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis, marking an “Easter of war,” on Sunday urged leaders to hear the people’s plea for peace in Ukraine and implicitly criticised Russia for dragging the country into a “cruel and senseless” conflict. Speaking to some 50,000 people in St. Peter’s Square for his twice yearly “Urbi et Orbi” (to the city and world) address, Francis said Ukraine was “sorely tried by the violence and destruction of the cruel and senseless war into which it was dragged”, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T10:20:26Z'}, {'id': '625be7478f08a3f8f35ec7e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The president of the European Commission has urged member states to supply Ukraine with weapons systems “quickly” and suggested that a next round of EU sanctions could target Russia’s powerful Sberbank and include an embargo on Russian oil. “It applies to all member states: those who can should deliver quickly, because only that way Ukraine can survive in its acute defensive battle against Russia,” Ursula von der Leyen told Germany’s Bild am Sonntag newspaper. Several European nations appear to be vacillating over the export of heavy weapons such as tanks or fighter jets, amid concerns that such a move could formally escalate the war in Ukraine into a direct conflict between Russia and Nato member states.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T10:09:40Z'}, {'id': '625be0268f08790595e27fd7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president has said the situation in Mariupol was ‘inhuman’ and called on allies to provide heavy weapons in order to save the city from Russian forces. He insisted that leaders of other countries must provide weapons ‘immediately’ or intervene to force Russia into further negotiations. Russian troops have maintained a blockade in Mariupol since the early days of the invasion at a horrific cost to trapped and starving civilians.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:39:26Z'}, {'id': '625bdfe98f08a3f8f35ec7b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has asked G7 nations for $50 billion in financial support and is also considering issuing 0% coupon bonds to help it cover a war-linked budget deficit over the next six months, the president’s economic adviser Oleh Ustenko said on Sunday. Speaking on national television, Ustenko said these options were being actively discussed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:37:58Z'}, {'id': '625bd6398f08790595e27fb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Another missile attack in the early hours of Sunday damaged infrastructure in the city of Brovary, near Kyiv, Igor Sapozhko, mayor of Brovary said in an online post. It is the third consecutive day of attacks in the capital after 2 weeks of relative calm. On Friday, Russian forces destroyed a plant which allegedly produced one of the missiles used to sink the Moskva warship in the Black Sea. Then, on Saturday, Russian rockets allegedly hit a military hardware factory in the capital’s Darnytskyi district. The sudden development of events is linked to the destruction of the jewel of the Russian fleet by Ukrainian forces during a combat operation in the Black Sea on Wednesday – a blow to Vladimir Putin’s war plans and his military’s prestige.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:01:59Z'}, {'id': '625bd5378f086dda4ef5e581', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Many of the nearly 5 million people who have fled Ukraine will not have homes to return to, the United Nations warned. When, at the end of January, Poland’s deputy interior minister, Maciej Wąsik, said his country had “to be prepared for a wave of up to a million people” in the event of a major Russian invasion of Ukraine, many thought he was exaggerating. After 53 days from the Russian invasion, according to UNHCR, almost 5 million Ukrainians have left the country. About 90% of those who fled are women and children, after the government introduced martial law banning men aged 18-60 from leaving. Early in April, UNHCR reported that more than 7 million people were internally displaced in the country.\nPoland remains the main destination for Ukrainian refugees, with the country having received approximately 2.69 million refugees, followed by Romania with about 720,000 people. Last week the UK home secretary, Priti Patel, apologised for the time it had taken for Ukrainian refugees to arrive in the UK under two visa schemes, after new figures showed just 12,000 had so far reached Britain.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:01:01Z'}, {'id': '625bd1348f08790595e27f96', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine and Russia have failed to agree on Sunday about humanitarian convoys for the evacuation of civilians from war-affected areas, according to Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk. “We have not been able to agree ... about ceasefires on evacuation routes. That is why, unfortunately, we are not opening humanitarian corridors today,” she said on her Telegram account. Vereshchuk also said that the Ukrainian authorities had asked for humanitarian corridors for the evacuation of civilians and wounded Ukrainian troops from the besieged port of Mariupol, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:02:28Z'}, {'id': '625bcbd78f086dda4ef5e559', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian armed forces destroyed an ammunition factory near Kyiv, Russian defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov said on Sunday. “Overnight, high-precision air-launched missiles destroyed an ammunition factory near the town of Brovary in Kyiv region,” Konashenkov said, as reported by the Reuters news agency.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:03:08Z'}, {'id': '625bc79b8f08790595e27f84', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bulgaria has banned Russian-flagged ships from entering its Black Sea ports as part of expanded EU sanctions, the country’s maritime administration announced on its website on Sunday. “All vessels registered under Russian flag, as well as all vessels that have switched their Russian flag, or flag or maritime register registration to any other state whatsoever after 24 February, are forbidden access to Bulgarian maritime and river ports,” the authority said. Exceptions will be made only for ships in distress or seeking humanitarian assistance, or ships transporting energy products, food and pharmaceuticals to EU countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T09:03:36Z'}, {'id': '625bbdef8f08a3f8f35ec735', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The city of Kramatorsk feels empty. Only a handful of supermarkets, restaurants and hotels are still open. Windows along the main streets are boarded up. Many residents have moved out of their apartment blocks and into houses in neighbouring villages, where they judge it will be safer. The few locals walking around behave as if they can’t hear the sirens blaring and appear not to flinch from the occasional thunder of incoming shells. Russia’s war in Ukraine is moving into a new phase centred on the Donbas region in the east, and most of its citizens are not taking any chances. Regional mayors told the Observer they estimated that about 70% of the population had left since Russia’s offensive began in February. Ukrainian-controlled Donbas is surrounded by Russian forces from the north, east and south. Ukraine’s authorities believe Russian forces are aiming to encircle the territory by cutting off their supply lines from the west. Russian-backed forces have held about a third of the region since 2014. Russia had hoped and possibly expected that its attempts to gain more territory would be popular with the mainly Russian-speaking population. But eight years of conflict, and particularly the last eight weeks, have taken their toll.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T07:13:32Z'}, {'id': '625bbb188f086dda4ef5e519', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thanks all for following, I will now be handing over the blog to my colleague Tom Ambrose in London.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T07:03:47Z'}, {'id': '625bb9468f08a3f8f35ec72b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A missile attack in early hours of Sunday damaged infrastructure in the city of Brovary, near Ukraine’s capital of Kyiv, Igor Sapozhko, mayor of Brovary said in an online post. There were no details on the extent of the destruction and potential casualties.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T06:53:09Z'}, {'id': '625bb7e78f08790595e27f49', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainians teaching in a war zone: bombed-out schools, evacuations and board games Yulia Kuryliuk, a teacher in a village near Lviv, woke on 24 February to find her country at war and gathered her sixth-grade class on Zoom. Two children tearfully asked when the fighting would end. She didn’t have an answer, but she led her students through breathing exercises to manage anxiety and encouraged them to hug a relative, pet, or stuffed animal for comfort. With Ukraine’s education system upended by the war, teachers are helping provide stability for their students, along with other forms of emergency support such as evacuation and humanitarian aid. While the ministry of education and science declared a two-week break after Russia’s full-scale invasion began, lessons have now resumed where possible, though they are frequently interrupted by the wail of air raid sirens.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T06:47:39Z'}, {'id': '625bb4698f08a3f8f35ec712', 'bodyTextSummary': '‘I feel really lost but not lonely’: a Kherson mother’s diary of flight from a war zone Olha spent weeks living under Russian occupation in her home town of Kherson, southern Ukraine. Now she tells her story of fleeing the violence and travelling across Europe with two children and a cat in tow. Groups of people who wanted to leave Kherson appeared on Telegram. People shared information and exchanged ideas. The first message in our group from anyone who had escaped came from a girl called Alinka. Her boyfriend took her out along a country road. It gave us a ray of hope.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T06:33:42Z'}, {'id': '625bb3dc8f08790595e27f34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s demand that Ukrainian forces in Mariupol surrender by 3am GMT passed without immediate signs of a response, as Volodymyr Zelenskiy warned that peace talks would be scrapped if the city’s remaining defenders were killed. As air raid sirens sounded across Ukraine, including in the Kyiv region, early on Sunday, Russia said its troops had cleared most of the besieged city, with only a small contingent of Ukrainian fighters remaining in the giant Azovstal steelworks in the south-eastern port, as missiles hit Kyiv and other cities. If it falls, it would be Russia’s first seizure of a major city. Ukraine’s president said in a video address: “The situation in Mariupol remains as severe as possible. Just inhuman … Russia is deliberately trying to destroy everyone who is there.” He added: “The elimination of our troops, of our men [in Mariupol] will put an end to any negotiations”, and called on the west to immediately provide heavy weapons.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T06:30:25Z'}, {'id': '625bb0bb8f086dda4ef5e4ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'While life seemed to be slowly returning to the streets of Kyiv, a fresh series of Russian airstrikes came as a reminder this weekend that the war in the Ukrainian capital is far from over. Following two weeks of relative calm, on Friday the Russian forces destroyed a plant which allegedly produced one of the missiles used to sink the Moskva warship in the Black Sea. The attack was the most significant revenge strike by the Kremlin after the sinking of Russia’s flagship vessel. Then, on Saturday, Russian rockets allegedly hit a military hardware factory in the capital’s Darnytskyi district. “They are making us pay for destroying the Moskva,” Andrei Sizov, the 47-year-old owner of a nearby wood workshop.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T06:17:01Z'}, {'id': '625baeb98f08a3f8f35ec6f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Austrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer, who met with Vladimir Putin this past week in Moscow — the first European leader to do so since the invasion began Feb. 24 — said the Russian president is “in his own war logic” on Ukraine. In an interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” Nehammer said he thinks Putin believes he is winning the war and “we have to look in his eyes and we have to confront him with that, what we see in Ukraine.’’ Nehammer said he confronted Putin with what he saw during a visit to the Kyiv suburb of Bucha, where more than 350 bodies have been found along with evidence of killings and torture under Russian occupation, and “it was not a friendly conversation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T06:08:14Z'}, {'id': '625baa4d8f08a3f8f35ec6ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK government’s latest intelligence update this morning says: Russian forces continue to redeploy combat and support equipment from Belarus towards eastern Ukraine. This includes locations close to Kharkiv and Severdonetsk. Russian artillery continues to strike Ukrainian positions throughout the east of the country where Russia plans to renew its offensive activity Though Russia’s operational focus has shifted to eastern Ukraine, Russia’s ultimate objective remains the same. It is committed to compelling Ukraine to abandon its Euro-Atlantic orientation and asserting its own regional dominance', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T05:52:15Z'}, {'id': '625ba2f78f08790595e27ef0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia told Ukrainian forces fighting in Mariupol to lay down arms on Sunday morning to save their lives, but there were no immediate reports of activity two hours after the ultimatum took effect at 3am GMT in the strategic southeastern port. Russia’s defence ministry claimed it had all but taken control of Mariupol, aside from a few Ukrainian defenders left in a steel plant, but the claim could not be independently verified. It would be the first major city to have fallen to Russian forces since the invasion which began on 24 February', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T05:21:09Z'}, {'id': '625ba1808f08790595e27eed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For a comprehensive visual guide on the Russian invasion of Ukraine, look no further than this excellent interactive piece prepared by my colleagues earlier this week', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T05:15:51Z'}, {'id': '625b99888f08790595e27ed8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning from Delhi and happy Easter to those who celebrate. Hannah Ellis-Petersen here on the live blog for the next few hours following the developments in Ukraine. Here is a summary of today’s events so far: The 3am GMT deadline set by Moscow for Ukrainian soldiers in the besieged city of Mariupol to “surrender or die” has passed, with no reports yet from the Ukrainian or Russian sides if the city has fallen fully to Russian control. On Saturday, the Russian defence ministry said it had cleared urban areas of Ukrainian forces, and the remaining defenders were trapped in a steelworks. The Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy described the situation in Mariupol as “inhuman” and called on the west to prove more arms. “The successes of our military on the battlefield are really significant, historically significant. But they are still not enough to clean our land of the occupiers,” he said. Russian forces have renewed missile strikes on Kyiv and intensified shelling of Kharkiv, in an apparent strategy to hobble Ukraine’s defences ahead of an expected full-scale Russian assault in the east. Explosions were heard in the early hours on Sunday in Kyiv. Russia had warned it would step up its missile bombardment following the sinking of its battleship Moskva. Russian air defence units have reportedly brought down a military transport plane carrying Western arms outside Odesa. The Ukraine president warned that the world “needs to prepare” for the possibility of Russia using nuclear weapons. On Saturday, the mayor of Trostianets, a city in Ukraine’s northern Sumy region, claimed that authorities have found the remains of chemical weapons including Sarin in the village of Bilka, which had been occupied by the Russians. The allegation has not been verified. Russia’s foreign ministry barred entry to the country for Johnson and other British government politicians and members in response to the government’s “hostile action” including sanctions. The Kremlin said it would expand restrictions against British politicians over what it calls a “wave of anti-Russian hysteria.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T05:16:13Z'}, {'id': '625bdb028f086dda4ef5e593', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Galina Muzyra moved around her front garden as she cleaned up the mess left by occupying Russian soldiers. “They parked two armoured vehicles on my lawn,” she said, pointing to a flattened blue fence next to her neat vegetable patch. Nearby, amid blackcurrant bushes, was a large crater. Her yellow-painted dacha was perforated with holes. Shrapnel had wrecked the wooden summer house too. It was a birthday gift from her late husband Nikolai, Muzyra explained. “We don’t understand why the Russians did this. We are a small quiet country. If it wasn’t for our president I don’t know what we would do,” she added, throwing splintered branches and other rubbish on to a spring bonfire.\nMuzyra and her son, Denis, live in Zalissya, a village on the highway between the capital Kyiv and the northern Ukrainian city of Chernihiv. For 20 days, between 8 and 28 March, Russian troops took over her home, sleeping on top of her kitchen stove. The property survived better than many others. The house next door is a charred, roofless shell. A burned-out Lada sat in its courtyard, next to a ravaged vine trellis. Across swathes of territory vacated by Russia’s armed forces a great clean-up was under way. Homeowners were tidying up and counting the cost of a devastating month-long occupation. Ukrainian army sappers collected left-behind munitions and defused mines – a vast ongoing job. They swept Muzyra’s garden where a rocket landed amid daffodils and a blossoming apple tree.\nA few doors down the road workers from Ukraine’s Dtek energy company were busy restoring the electricity supply. “We’re trying to help people,” one shouted, speaking from the top of a damaged pole. Russia’s invasion left 1.5 million Ukrainians without power. Emergency crews have recently reconnected more than 980,000 households to the grid, the firm said. Farther north in Chernihiv, residents were celebrating Easter after a traumatic 25-day siege. Russian forces advancing from Belarus bombarded the city. Several hundred people died. A couple of shells landed in front of Chernihiv’s gold-domed St Catherine’s church, one of an ensemble of ancient buildings dating back to Kyivan Rus, Ukraine’s original medieval dynasty. Worshippers carrying Palm Sunday willow branches crossed themselves inside the 11th-century Transfiguration Cathedral, where an Orthodox service was under way. Others enjoyed secular pleasures. Vyacheslav Radchenko and his wife, Marina, were fishing from the bank of Chernihiv’s picturesque Desna river. Above them pedestrians and cyclists crossed the city’s damaged and only surviving bridge.\n“This is the first time we have been fishing for six weeks, since the war started,” Marina said. “It was a terrible time. The worst moment was when Russian warplanes bombed us. My hair went white. But we are optimists. Life goes on.” Vyacheslav said the city’s internet and electricity supply were back but there was a shortage of glass to repair broken windows, and a lot of damage. Harder to fix were the city’s relations with Belarus, whose president, Alexander Lukashenko, facilitated Vladimir Putin’s attempt to seize Kyiv and to topple its government. Belarusians came to Chernihiv to go shopping, Vyacheslav said. He was hoping to catch bream and roach, he added, but had had no luck so far. “Our biggest fear is that the Russians come back,” he admitted. In his latest video address, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, pledged to modernise urban areas destroyed by Russia. The priority was to find temporary housing for citizens forced to flee their homes, he said. They would be given money or materials to rebuild, with the plan subsequently expanded to all affected cities and communities. Veterans and state workers would be a housing priority, he said. Outside Chernihiv, the years-long scale of this ambitious project was grimly apparent. The road south threaded through matchstick-like trees shredded by Russian missiles. Several bridges had been blown up. Enemy armed vehicles destroyed in a Ukrainian counterattack littered the road. One was marked with the letter “O”, the symbol of Russia’s Chernihiv offensive.\nIn the village of Ivanivka most houses were trashed, as if by tornado. One resident, Yulia – who declined to give her surname – said Russian soldiers killed her brother-in-law and her neighbour, a veteran from the Soviet war in Afghanistan. The soldiers lived in her house for 25 days, she said, taking over her bedroom. She and her 13-year-old son, Zheniya, slept in the candle-lit basement. “I asked them why they had come here. They told me: ‘We are here to liberate you from your government and from Nato.’ I explained that we voted for our government every five years and didn’t need liberating,” Yulia recounted. “They told us we lived in an elite village, which is a little hilarious. I’m not sure they had seen proper roads.” Yulia said the soldiers stole most of her belongings including her son’s mountain bike. They confiscated her husband’s mobile phone and shot it. After the Russians left the family fixed up their windows with plastic sheeting and plywood. Repairing the holes left by bullets would take money, which they didn’t have, she said, adding: “What happened here was a terrible dream.” Over in the village church the priest Georgy Petrosuk was preparing for his first post-occupation prayer service. He said a team of volunteers had cleared up. He was hoping to complete the dusting in time for Easter, he added, as he frantically wiped down icons and pictures of the holy family with a wet cloth. Someone had peppered the building with machine gun rounds. His parishioners had fitted a new door, he said.\nFurther down the road, the neighbouring settlement of Yahidne was in a pitiful state. Russian units had taken over most properties, marking them with a V. They had herded several hundred people at gunpoint into the basement of the village school. There was little oxygen. Eleven people, including a 13-year-old girl, died there, amid choking darkness. Medical investigators on Sunday had parked outside. One resident, Nina Alexeevna, said she had spent an entire week cleaning the mess left by soldiers who squatted in her home. They had occupied the flat of her neighbour who had not yet returned. Alexeevna showed off the bedrooms and kitchen – a feral jumble of clothes, upturned drawers, and scattered books. “This is Russky Mir,” she said ironically, referring to the idea of a Kremlin-dominated Russian-speaking cultural world.\nAlexeevna said her “soul” felt better after her epic clean. There were a few other tentative signs of normality. In the neighbouring street Katya Balanovitch had tidied and hoed her large garden plot, previously smothered by a Russian tank. She was burning corn stubble in preparation for the summer growing season. “I will sow carrots and tomatoes,” she said. Amid the horror and large-scale vandalism there was a symbolic return. The white stork, Ukraine’s national bird, had taken up residence as usual along the road which the Russians had used in their unsuccessful and apocalyptic advance towards Kyiv. Several storks sat on giant nests, built on top of telegraph poles. One soared high above over the carcass of a Russian armoured vehicle.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T15:37:32Z'}, {'id': '624b257d8f08ce9799e1fdc9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When government officials in the southern Nigerian state of Edo set about radically improving poor internet access for its population of 4 million, they didn’t have to look far for help. MainOne, a company responsible for laying a vast network of fibre-optic cables across west Africa, was an obvious partner. Another, perhaps less obvious one, was Facebook. A joint agreement was signed to install fibre-optic cables running across the state’s capital, Benin City. Since 2019, 400km (250 miles) of cables have been laid in Edo, about a quarter via the partnership between the two companies and the government. “Obviously, Facebook isn’t really a digital infrastructure company, but they invested in these cables,” said Emmanuel Magnus Eweka, who worked as a senior government official for the Edo government until last September. In recent years, as Facebook has come under rising legislative pressure in the west, the company has increased its focus on Africa, particularly in countries where the regulatory and legislative environment tends to be much looser. The combination of weak and expensive internet coverage for most of Nigeria’s fast-growing population of more than 200 million people has meant that companies hoping to tap into a potential goldmine of new users – and their data – have sought to invest in the business of helping those potential users get online in the first place. “To make internet data more affordable, Facebook needs to build infrastructures that are almost free,” Eweka said. “In fact, I’d say Facebook actually loses in terms of making money out of those cables. But then they gain it back on the user data that they will generate, and obviously that has huge potential in a country like Nigeria.”\nNew potential users are rapidly emerging in countries with fast-growing populations and rising smartphone use driven by increased connectivity. Just over half of Nigeria’s population currently has access to the internet, and the proportion with access is rising each year. In places like Edo, where government officials are committed to overhauling sparse and expensive internet access, there are ripe opportunities for Meta, Facebook’s parent company, to become increasingly central to digital infrastructure, thereby positioning itself to capitalise on the increased connectivity that will follow. Edo’s governor, Godwin Obaseki, has in recent years driven a digitisation agenda that touches on many areas of ordinary life, and tech companies have become fundamental parts of it. In 2019, Facebook invested $20m in internet infrastructure in Edo, and committed alongside MainOne to laying 750km of fibre-optic cables in Edo and the south-western state of Ogun. Both states have committed to building business and technology hubs, expanding internet access for entrepreneurs, tech workers, government agencies and schools. Faster internet supplied through the cables has underpinned a drive to change the way the government in Edo works. The state’s previously “analogue” civil service now uses an online government portal according to Eweka, supported by parternships with Microsoft and using fibre-optic internet access provided by MainOne and Facebook. “The level of accountability this system brings is so effective,” Eweka said. “Right now, if a case file is sent to a civil servant from the governor’s office, the governor can see exactly when it is opened, and whether it has been actualised. So the days where you send one file somewhere and it gets lost in the system are gone.”\nSchools in Edo and areas where fibre-optic cables can be accessed have benefited from subsidised internet connectivity and are also working with Microsoft-based learning programs, improving the quality of education, officials say. Last November, the government launched the Edo Tech Park, a largely as-yet-unbuilt project on 200,000sq km of land that developers envision will be the centre of the state’s growing tech ecosystem. The hub will provide “live-in, work apartments, residential and commercial real estate, tech incubators, and offices for rent”. Fundamental to the plans are the increased access to faster and cheaper internet services that Meta has helped provide. Stephen Osawaru, a 38-year-old entrepreneur and business consultant in Benin City, works with a network of more than 300 startups in the state. “Many internet businesses in education, agriculture, health and finance didn’t exist five years ago that have now taken advantage of the connectivity in Edo,” he said. “The internet is better and cheaper than it was five years ago; internet penetration is growing at an exponential rate and creating more opportunities,” he said. Both of his businesses have thrived as a result of engagement through Facebook and Instagram and through WhatsApp broadcasts to customers. Funke Opeke founded MainOne in 2008. Since then, a single deep-sea cable running south along the edge of the Atlantic, from Portugal to west Africa and on to South Africa, has expanded, spawning a vast maze of fibre-optic connections. She describes the public-private partnerships in Edo as “a model” for how internet access in Nigeria can be rapidly increased.\nOpeke said cables are leased by other telecommunication companies and that this lowered costs for mobile operators because operators do not have to build their own infrastructure. “We also build to all the critical points of importance for governments so that we’re able to deliver services to them and help their automation. It’s accelerating development and state services to the people – a win-win for the government and the private sector.” Others are more circumspect, acknowledging the potential benefits to the country alongside the motives of the companies involved. When partnership announcements are made, the tone has sounded “quite altruistic, like they [the technology companies] are doing this to help,” said Gbemisola Alonge, a senior development analyst at Stears, an economic analysis company in Lagos. “But it’s never like that. It’s to expand their reach and increase their [user] base.” A Meta spokesperson said the company worked with partners “to drive innovation on all aspects of performance and efficiency” and that its partnership with MainOne had helped bring online training to 2,000 teachers in Edo and connectivity to four schools and their surrounding communities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-19T09:23:24Z'}, {'id': '625caf928f08790595e284ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has called for more weapons, describing “every delay” as “permission for Russia to take the lives of Ukrainians”. In his latest address, he appealed to countries to send arms, saying Ukraine’s fate “depends upon them”. Zelenskiy also claimed in the address that the regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in Ukraine’s south were being transferred to “the ruble zone” and subordinated to Russian administration. The Ukrainian president said Russia’s actions in the territories were following the example of the so-called separatist republics of the DPR and LPR. Ukraine has vowed that its forces will “fight to the end” in the besieged port city of Mariupol, after a Russian ultimatum for the remaining Ukrainian troops there to surrender expired. A second British soldier fighting with the Ukrainian army was paraded on Russian television after being captured in Mariupol. Shaun Pinner, 48, said he had been fighting alongside Ukrainian marines when Vladimir Putin’s forces invaded nearly eight weeks ago. Ukraine has completed a questionnaire which will form a starting point for the European Union to decide on membership for Kyiv, Ihor Zhovkva, deputy head of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office, said. A fresh series of Russian airstrikes came as a reminder this weekend that the war in the Ukrainian capital is far from over, despite signs of more normal life returning to the streets in recent days. An unverified photo claiming to show the Russian warship Moskva moments after it was reportedly hit by a Ukrainian Neptune missile has surfaced online. The source of the image is unclear and the Guardian has not been able to immediately verify its authenticity. Zelenskiy said he has invited French President Emmanuel Macron to visit Ukraine to see for himself evidence that Russian forces have committed “genocide”, a term Macron has avoided using. Earlier on Sunday Zelenskiy urged US president Joe Biden to visit Ukraine and reiterated that he is not willing to cede territory in the country’s east to end war with Russia. Zelenskiy said he was “hopeful” Biden would make the trip. The president of the European Commission has urged member states to supply Ukraine with weapons systems “quickly” and suggested that a next round of EU sanctions could target Russia’s powerful Sberbank. The International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, said she had a “very good call” with Ukraine’s president. She added: “Continued economic support by Ukraine’s partners is essential to lay the foundations for rebuilding a modern competitive Ukraine.” The United Nations refugee agency said 4,869,019 Ukrainians had left the country since Russia invaded in February – up 32,574 from Saturday’s total, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees chief, Filippo Grandi’s, said on Sunday. Oleg Synegubov, head of the Kharkiv regional administration, said Ukrainian forces were successfully pushing the Russians back to the east of the city and that several villages were liberated. At least two people were killed and four injured on Sunday in the shelling of the eastern Ukrainian town of Zolote, the local governor said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T01:05:46Z'}, {'id': '624f7b688f0887d7b40d6180', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Since the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano erupted in Tonga in January, killing four people, the Pacific nation has received more than 200 shipping containers of aid supplies, including 86,000 bottles of water. After the HMAS Canberra arrived from Australia, bringing with it two helicopters and more than 417 tonnes of equipment and supplies, the prime minister of Tonga, Siaosi Sovaleni, gave a speech thanking Australia for its help. “The [international] assistance brought just over 114,600 litres [of water] that came in plastic bottles meaning about 86,000 water bottles of 1.5 litres,” he said. “This number is staggering because of the time frame, within one month.”\nWhile the aid has been essential and welcome, especially given concerns about ashfall affecting drinking water supplies, it has left Tonga with a significant issue: what to do with the waste. Since the tsunami, in the worst affected villages and the halls in Nuku’alofa where people have been living since moving from the islands in Ha’apai, rubbish bins are filled with plastic water bottles. There is no recycling collection in Tonga, which means plastic waste ends up in landfill.\nTonga has very limited space for landfill. The country’s only rubbish tip, which has been in operation since 2006, has just four cells for storing rubbish, with each cell meant to be large enough to house at least 20 years’ worth of waste from across the country. The second one is filling up fast. The volcanic eruption and tsunami earlier this year, which the government called “unprecedented” disasters, have not helped.\nAs well as plastic rubbish from relief efforts, the tsunami produced huge quantities of rubbish from household furniture and inorganic waste as buildings were destroyed. In the worst-affected village of Kanokupolu, located on the west end of Tongatapu, five truckloads of rubbish – including aluminium sheets, wood and drenched suitcases of clothes – were collected. “There were huge boulder rocks. We still don’t know how they were brought in by the waves but these rocks were massive. They were huge … we didn’t have the equipment to clear them,” said Lola Liava’a Tonga, the manager of Administration and Projects at Tonga Waste Authority Ltd. Some work to remove and recycle waste has started. Last month, volunteers from the No Pelesitiki (plastic) campaign spent two Saturdays collecting plastic waste from more than 1,500 households, which were compacted, wrapped into plastic bales and loaded on the HMAS Canberra for disposal in Australia. The founder of the No Pelesitiki Campaign, Eleni Leveni Tevi, said people responded strongly to the collection and are keen to see it become a regular occurrence.\n“In fact, a lot of people are already asking when will be the next one. They are continuing to segregate their plastic waste but when they put it out for the normal pickup, it doesn’t get picked up.” But No Pelesitiki doesn’t have the means to do regular plastic recycling collection, without the money to pay for labour or an appropriate collection vehicle. “When No Pelesitiki doesn’t have the means to do that, it discourages people to continue with the segregation,” Tevi said. “We resort back to leaving it as mixed rubbish which is canceling the whole effort of trying to raise awareness on segregating the plastic. “All these plastic wastes end up at Tapuhia landfill. “We have the idea and plan on how to tackle Tonga’s plastic issue, we have the passion but we can just do so much. We are all volunteers with full-time jobs or attending schools with only the weekends to attend to No Pelesitiki activities,” he said. “There’s quite [a lot] of logistics around this work that needs daily commitment.”\nThe HMAS Canberra brought with it two balers to be donated to Tonga’s Waste Authority so that rubbish can be compressed. They are being housed at Tapuhia Landfill recycling centre, which also houses a plastic shredder and two glass crushers, also from donors. The Waste Authority says it will be rolling out a new recycling service to collect plastic bottles and glass bottles, as well as training and support for the service on how to use the balers when lockdown is lifted. “It’s a lot of work,” said Tonga. “Like all things, it won’t happen overnight. We have been working on it for years now. We focus a lot on the kids. The youth and the kids, I think are beginning to get the picture and they can go home and teach their parents. Public awareness programs do help as well to educate the public and [get them to] not throw rubbish in the sea.” “There needs to be a holistic approach to tackle the issue with plastic waste. Waste is everybody’s business.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-18T03:53:08Z'}, {'id': '62564f798f08115fda85576a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Health experts are warning Australia could soon face its worst flu season in years as Covid transmission across the country remains high. There were more than 360,000 positive tests recorded around the country in the past week, and nearly half a million people are isolating with active Covid-19.\nThanks to vaccination and the less severe but highly transmissible Omicron variant, the vast majority of people who get Covid will have symptoms that are manageable at home. If you are self-isolating with Covid, these are some treatments and techniques that may help to alleviate symptoms. Covid at home generally Support services and home care guides are available to help people assess Covid symptoms, including the coronavirus hotline on 1800 675 398, the federal government’s Health Direct guidelines, and the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners’ guide. Stay hydrated Staying well hydrated is important after a Covid diagnosis, says Dr Suzi Nou, a Melbourne anaesthetist who has been managing Covid-positive patients in the community. Since the surge of the Omicron BA.2 subvariant, Nou has noticed an increase in Covid patients presenting mainly with gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly in children and teenagers, which can contribute to dehydration. “Their presenting symptom is diarrhoea or vomiting,” Nou says, also noting nausea, loss of appetite, and weight loss. “I’ve been surprised with how dehydrated people have been getting.” She advises her Covid patients to avoid spicy and rich foods and to “really keep the fluids up. It seems to be – more so than your usual cold – something that can really upset your tummy and cause dehydration”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nThe RACGP’s home care guide suggests individuals “manage hydration carefully through small regular sips of fluid, and consider oral rehydration salts” such as Hydralyte. To avoid dehydration, you should “drink water before you feel thirsty”, according to Health and Wellbeing Queensland. “An easy way to tell if you are hydrated enough is by the colour of your urine – drink enough so it is pale yellow.” Lie prone A cough or mild shortness of breath may be improved by lying on your front rather than your back. Prone positioning may “improve oxygen levels in the blood”, according to Covid-19 clinical evidence taskforce guidelines. “We know that more of your lung tissue is at your back,” says Nou. “If you lie on your front, the effects of gravity mean that the water in your lungs will come to your front so you’ll have more lung surface area to help with breathing.” Severe difficulty breathing or worsening shortness of breath, however, are considered red flags that indicate someone may need hospital care, as are fainting or collapse and blue lips or face. Nasal sprays may also help to provide relief for symptoms of nasal congestion, the RACGP guide suggests. Rest if fatigued “I repeat to all my patients that Covid infects your whole body. Let’s get away from this idea of it just being a respiratory illness,” Nou says. “If you are getting fatigued, to me that’s a sign that you do have some of it affecting your brain, which is very common.” Other common symptoms include difficulty concentrating, visual changes, and mood disturbances. Nou’s advice is “to let your brain rest, particularly when you’re in that first seven to 14 days of being unwell”. She suggests to her patients to minimise time spent in front of screens. “It’s a little bit like if people have a concussion.”\nThe fatigue may persist after the acute infection, and a staged return to work or school may be necessary for some. “Some people can get back to work [straight away] and be fine,” says Nou. “Some people take a little bit longer.” “It’s not like muscle [that you] just keep pushing and working harder, and get stronger and better. It’s actually inflammation,” she says. “With inflammation, you’re actually better off … reducing activity and letting [it] settle.” Can drugs or vitamins help? Paracetamol or ibuprofen can be taken to alleviate symptoms, including a fever or body aches. Experts note that pregnant women, however, should avoid ibuprofen. Doctors may prescribe oral antiviral drugs for certain people with mild Covid who are at higher risk of developing severe disease – such as those who are unvaccinated, older than 60, or have underlying chronic medical conditions. There is little clinical evidence to suggest that vitamin supplements are beneficial in treating or preventing Covid. Vitamin D – which can be toxic in high doses – has been discussed in relation to the coronavirus, but one systematic review found: “The evidence for the effectiveness of vitamin D supplementation for the treatment of Covid‐19 is very uncertain.” A 2021 clinical trial in people with mild Covid-19 found that taking high-dose zinc, vitamin C or a combination of the two supplements had no benefit in reducing the duration of symptoms. Australia’s clinical evidence taskforce guidelines don not recommend zinc, among certain other therapeutics, as a treatment for Covid: “There is not enough evidence to support the safe and effective use of these drugs.” In addition, vitamin C is water soluble; if you consume more than your body can store, it isn’t toxic, but it is excreted in urine. “Excess vitamin C literally goes down the toilet,” Healthdirect, the national public health information service, points out. In many cases, as health experts have previously pointed out, taking multivitamins just results in “very expensive urine”. Preventing transmission Getting an adequate sleep and having a balanced diet may help to boost one’s immune system, but the best protections against Covid are oft-repeated public health measures: getting vaccinated and boosted, wearing a mask, and opting to spend time outdoor or in well-ventilated spaces. “The biggest thing in terms of not getting infected – rather than boosting your immune system and spending money on vitamins and supplements – is just avoiding high-risk situations and wearing the right protection while having to go into high-risk situations,” says Nou. “I’d rather spend my money on an N95 mask.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T05:22:59Z'}, {'id': '625bf1888f086dda4ef5e60b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has vowed that its forces will “fight to the end” in the besieged port city of Mariupol, after a Russian ultimatum for the remaining Ukrainian troops there to surrender expired. Moscow is edging closer to full control of the city in what would be its biggest prize since it invaded Ukraine in February. Relentless bombardment and street fighting have left much of the city pulverised, killing at least 21,000 people by Ukrainian estimates. “The city still has not fallen,” the prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said hours after Moscow’s deadline for fighters holed up and surrounded in a sprawling, fortress-like steelworks to surrender passed. “There’s still our military forces, our soldiers. So they will fight to the end,” he told ABC. The fall of Mariupol, the largest trading port in the Sea of Azov – from which Ukraine exports grain, iron, steel and heavy machinery – would be an economic blow to Kyiv and a symbolic and strategic victory for Russia, connecting territory it holds in Donbas with the Crimea region it annexed in 2014. It would also help reassure the Russian public amid the worsening economic situation from western sanctions and make more troops available for a new offensive in the east, which, if successful, would give the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, a position of strength from which to pressure Ukraine into making concessions. On Saturday night the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, described the situation in the city as “inhuman” and accused Russia of “deliberately trying to destroy everyone” there.\nIn a possible acknowledgment that Russia was close to taking the city, he said Ukrainian troops controlled only a small part of Mariupol and faced much larger Russian numbers. The situation was “very difficult” in Mariupol, Zelenskiy told the Ukrayinska Pravda news portal. “Our soldiers are blocked; the wounded are blocked. There is a humanitarian crisis … Nevertheless, the guys are defending themselves.” Having failed to overcome Ukrainian resistance in the north, the Russian military has refocused its ground offensive on the eastern Donbas area while maintaining long-distance strikes elsewhere including the capital, Kyiv. Russia gave remaining Ukrainian soldiers a 6am Moscow time (3am GMT) deadline to lay down their arms and a 1pm (10am GMT) deadline to evacuate, which passed without any sign of compliance by Ukrainian fighters holed up in the smouldering Azovstal steelworks. The steelworks, one of Europe’s biggest metallurgical plants with a maze of rail tracks and blastfurnaces, has become a last stand for the outnumbered defenders.\n“All those who will continue resistance will be destroyed,” a Russian defence ministry spokesperson said on Sunday, raising fears of further bloodshed. The city has seen some of the fiercest fighting and worst civilian suffering since the invasion on 24 February, with bodies littering destroyed streets and thousands hunkered down in atrocious conditions underground. Zelenskiy said that if Russian forces killed Kyiv’s troops remaining to defend the city, then a fledgling negotiation process to end nearly two months of fighting would be ended. “The destruction of all our guys in Mariupol – what they are doing now – can put an end to any format of negotiations,” he said.\nUkraine’s minister of digital transformation, Mykhailo Fedorov, said the city was on “the verge of a humanitarian catastrophe” and warned the country was compiling evidence of alleged Russian atrocities there. “We will hand everything over to The Hague. There will be no impunity,” he said. Ukrainian authorities have urged people in Donbas to move west to escape a large-scale Russian offensive to capture Donetsk and Luhansk. There were more reports on Sunday of sporadic Russian strikes around major population centres across the country, after the humiliating loss of Russia’s Moskva warship in the Black Sea last week. The mayor of Brovary, close to Kyiv, said a missile attack had damaged infrastructure. Russia said it had destroyed an ammunition factory near the capital, according to the RIA news agency. It was the third attack in as many days on targets around Kyiv: on Friday Russian forces destroyed a plant that allegedly produced one of the missiles used to sink the Moskva, and on Saturday Russian rockets allegedly hit a military hardware factory in the capital’s Darnytskyi district.\nIn the north-east, Russian artillery pounded multiple neighbourhoods in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city. At least two people were killed and four others were injured, though the scale of the attack suggested the toll could rise. The barrage slammed into apartment buildings and left broken glass, debris and part of at least one rocket scattered on the street. Firefighters and residents scrambled to douse flames in several apartments that caught fire. The city’s mayor, Ihor Terekhov, said three people were killed and 34 wounded in strikes on Saturday. Despite the desperate situation in Mariupol, Ukraine said it was holding off Russian forces in other parts of the self-proclaimed republics in Donetsk and Luhansk. On Sunday, Ukrainian police in Donetsk said that over the past 24 hours Russian forces had opened fire from tanks, multiple rocket launchers and heavy artillery on 13 settlements under Ukrainian control, killing two civilians.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T17:43:17Z'}, {'id': '625c01a98f08790595e2809f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On a recent Saturday in April, Muscovites strolled around GES-2, a vast new arts centre built in a disused power station steps away from the Kremlin. But guests visiting the 54,400-sq-metre centre, designed by the pioneering Italian architect Renzo Piano, were faced with one hard-to-miss problem: the art was absent.\n“It is not the time for contemporary art when people are dying and blood is spilling. We can’t pretend as if life is normal,” said Evgeny Antufiev, a Russian artist who asked for his works to be removed from GES-2 shortly after Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February. At the end of last year Vladimir Putin toured the GES-2 museum alongside Leonid Mikhelson, one of the country’s richest businessmen, who financed the multimillion-dollar construction of the centre. Cameras followed Putin as he watched over the work of the Icelandic artist Ragnar Kjartansson – who inaugurated the much-anticipated GES-2 with Santa Barbara – A Living Sculpture, a theatrical piece that examined the relationship between Russia and the US.\nFew places now seem to epitomise Russia’s cultural decoupling from the west better than the large, empty walls of GES-2, created as Moscow’s answer to Tate Modern. “We need to end this illusion that things will get back to how they were before the war. Drinking cocktails at art openings as people are being killed feels criminal,” Antufiev said. Other Russian and foreign artists and curators, including Kjartansson, quickly distanced themselves from GES-2 when it became clear that the museum was not going to use its platform to oppose Russia’s invasion.\n“After the invasion, a lot of people were asking the institution to take a more prominent stand, like institutions were writing open letters saying GES-2 and other museums should say something, but it’s really a threat to their own existence,” said Francesco Manacorda, the former artistic director of the V-A-C Foundation in Moscow that manages GES-2, who resigned shortly after the war started. “I imagine that [exhibiting anti-war works] is out of the question. You know making an anti-war statement has legal consequences,” he added. Russia’s parliament last month passed a law imposing a jail term of up to 15 years for spreading “fake” news about the military in Ukraine. Another building that will remain empty in the coming weeks is the national pavilion of Russia at the Venice Biennale. The pavilion – built just before the 1917 Russian Revolution – is traditionally a meeting place for much of Russia’s political and cultural elite, who eagerly take the trip to Venice to be seen at arguably the most prestigious exhibition in the world. Days after Russia invaded Ukraine, two Russian artists declared that they could not represent their country at the pavilion, while their Lithuanian-born curator Raimundas Malašauskas resigned. “When the war started, it became clear to us that we cannot be in Venice because it is the pavilion of the Russian Federation. And even in a sort of middle ground, like Venice, on Italian soil, it’s still subordinate to the Russian ministry of culture,” Malašauskas said. Marat Gelman, a veteran Russian art collector, said as the war dragged on, only those Russian artists who openly protested against it in their art would be welcomed in Europe. “Artists should either protest the war in their work or keep quiet. I don’t believe there will be any space for compromise,” he said. In the early days of the war, when opposition to the conflict had not yet been criminalised, more than 17,000 Russians working in the arts signed an open letter demanding that the invasion should end. However, as the country launched its systematic crackdown on opposition to the war, hundreds of artists decided to leave the country. “I fled from Moscow, which has turned into Mordor. For me, personally, there were no options left – I would not be able to stay there and be silent, and given my current activities, I would not have been free for long,” said the Russian artist Antonina Baever. “The only art from Russia that is relevant now is activist, anti-war art, but they give from 15 days to 15 years for it,” Baever said, referring to the “fake news” law. For the rest of the cultural world that stayed behind, the message was made clear: fall in line.\nSpeaking at a meeting with leading cultural figures broadcast on national television last month, Putin set the tone by saying Russia was also engaged in a cultural battle against the west, comparing the treatment of Russian culture abroad to the burning of “unwanted literature” by Nazi supporters in Germany. His message was clearly heard in Moscow. Soon after, the city’s Bolshoi theatre announced that it would stage a series of performances in support of Russia’s “military operation” in Ukraine, with all proceeds going to the families of Russian soldiers who had died in combat. The Oleg Tabakov theatre posted the pro-war military symbol Z across the three-floor facade of its building in central Moscow. Still, some artists in the country have continued to protest against the war despite the risks.\nAlexandra Skochilenko, an artist from St Petersburg, was arrested last week for a daring performance in which she allegedly replaced supermarket price labels with messages protesting against Moscow’s military campaign in Ukraine. Skochilenko now faces up to 10 years in jail on charges of “discrediting” the Russian army. And on Tuesday, police raided an anti-war classical concert at a Moscow cultural centre, interrupting a performance by the pianist Alexei Lubimov, who in dramatic fashion finished playing the final bars of Schubert’s Impromptu Op 90 No 2 as two police officers took the stage.\nFor now, the once glitzy V-A-C will serve as a startling reminder of how the war changed Moscow overnight, as its former staff continue to grapple with the demise of the ambitious art project that was meant to bring Russia closer to the west. “The staff, it’s 250 people, worked together for this huge project, and with one action all of this has been taken away. I’m still in a mourning state,” Manacorda said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-17T21:58:52Z'}]}