{'type': 'liveblog', 'webTitle': ' Zelenskiy thanks visiting US senators and says Donbas situation is ‘very difficult’ – as it happened', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-14T23:04:15Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2022/may/14/russia-ukraine-war-ukrainian-forces-continue-kharkiv-pushback-difficult-negotiations-on-mariupol-evacuations-underway-zelenskiy-says-live', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine war live', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ukraine-live'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Minute by minute', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/minutebyminute'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Richard Luscombe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardluscombe'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jedidajah Otte', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jedidajah-otte'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kevin Rawlinson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-rawlinson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Livingstone', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-livingstone'}, {'tagTitle': 'Daniel Boffey', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daniel-boffey'}, {'tagTitle': 'Anna Fazackerley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/annafazackerley'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '627fdab88f083b856379a981', 'bodyTextSummary': 'North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, has warned his country has been thrown into “great turmoil” after reporting another 21 deaths, days after the secretive state first admitted it was in the grip of a coronavirus outbreak. The nation’s total death toll now stands at 27, with 524,440 illnesses attributed to a rapid spread of fever consistent with Covid since late April. The regime said 243,630 people had recovered and 280,810 remained in quarantine. However, it did not specify how many of the cases and deaths had been confirmed as Covid-19 infections. The wave of Covid-19 cases comes as other nations, such as South Africa, have reported fresh outbreaks of the disease while the US revealed last week that it had recorded more than 80m Covid cases since the pandemic began. More than one million people have died in the US from the disease, a figure described as “a tragic milestone” by President Joe Biden. These global developments indicate that the Covid pandemic is showing no signs of retreating. North Korea imposed “maximum preventive measures” in a nationwide lockdown on Friday after conceding that its attempts to contain the virus over the past two years had failed. “The spread of the malignant epidemic is a great turmoil to fall on our country since the founding,” Kim told an emergency meeting of the ruling Workers’ party. “But if we don’t lose focus in implementing epidemic policy and maintain strong organisation power … we can more than overcome the crisis.”\nThe outbreak presents a potentially serious risk to North Korea, which is not believed to have vaccinated its 26 million people. Its poorly resourced healthcare system would also struggle to cope with a major outbreak, say international health officials. Kee Park of Harvard Medical School said the regime is testing only 1,400 people a week. North Korea had previously insisted it had not recorded a single Covid case since it closed its borders at the start of the pandemic more than two years ago. That move cut off trade with China and inflicted more damage on an economy already battered by natural disaster and UN sanctions imposed in response to its nuclear and missile tests. After maintaining one of the world’s strictest border closures to shield its poor healthcare system, North Korea eventually reopened railroad freight traffic with China in January. North Korea has shunned offers of Covid vaccines from China and Russia, and from the World Health Organization’s Covax scheme – apparently because administering the jabs would require outside monitoring. In South Africa, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases reported last week that there had been 10,017 new Covid-19 cases a day. It was the first time since January that the institute had logged more than 10,000 new daily infections. Health authorities have warned the new surge of infections is driven by the BA.4 and BA.5 Omicron sub-variants, which are now dominant in South Africa. The country only exited a fourth wave of Covid in January but the southern hemisphere winter months had long been seen as a potential problem. However, the rapid spread of the new variants do not appear to have prompted an equivalent surge in hospitalisations, and severe disease, though another 114 deaths were reported on Friday, bringing the official total to 100,744. Joe Phaahla, the South African health minister, said vaccines remained the best defence against the virus and denied that the country’s vaccination effort had struggled to meet even modest objectives. Just under 50% of the adult population of about 40 million have received at least one dose of vaccine, with only 45% of adults fully vaccinated. More than two-thirds of the population are thought to have some immunity based on past exposure to the virus. In the US, health authorities have reported that coronavirus cases are surging in most counties in New York State, putting them on a high alert status under the national health guidelines which include recommendations for wearing masks indoors, including schools. By Thursday, new cases stood at more than 10,000 a day, a 47% increase in two weeks, with hospitalisations rising by 28% over that time period to more than 2,600 a day. About 77% of people are fully vaccinated in New York State, a figure that rises to 79% in New York City. Last week, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) reclassified Omicron BA.4 and BA.5 as “variants of concern” and said they threatened a significant overall increase in Covid-19 cases in the EU in the coming weeks and months but not any “significant increase in infection severity”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T19:39:23Z'}, {'id': '627f95388f08e6ce3a77ee70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The king of Bahrain is expected to attend the Royal Windsor horse show on Sunday after a personal invitation from the Queen, prompting anger from campaigners who claim the UK is “sportswashing” what they say is an increasingly repressive regime. King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa has been invited as a guest of the Queen, demonstrating a warmth of official ties despite the Middle Eastern state’s outlawing of political opposition, and human rights violations including torture. Ahead of the UK’s largest outdoor horse show, King Hamad offered congratulations to Vladimir Putin on Russia’s Victory Day, which was held last week. The Queen is expected to attend the horse show on Sunday to watch the platinum jubilee celebration in her honour. However, she will have to brave a protest, organised by the Campaign Against Arms Trade, that aims to highlight the event’s “sportswashing of human rights abuses in Bahrain”. Among those attending the protest are exiled activist Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, whose Bahraini citizenship was revoked after he previously protested against the king of Bahrain at the Windsor horse show and who is, in effect, stateless as a result. Alwadaei, director of the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy, said: “While the people of Bahrain continue to live under the brutal repression of the Al Khalifa dictatorship, with prisons full of peaceful dissidents, once again the red carpet is being rolled out for King Hamad in the UK. His invitation to the Royal Windsor horse show is morally bankrupt and sends a clear signal that the UK is a safe haven for dictators and human rights abusers.” On Friday an open letter was sent to the Queen by five MPs, including former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and two peers, warning that welcoming the king was “a huge error of judgment and sends a devastating message to the victims of this brutal rule”. A separate letter, signed by international rights groups, was sent to sponsors of the horse show, including Land Rover and Rolex, raising concerns over what it described as a “textbook example of sportswashing”.\nJeed Basyouni, who leads Reprieve’s Middle East team, said: “The UK welcomes King Hamad and agrees not to mention the people tortured into making false confessions by his security services. “And, each year, Bahrain’s rulers return home with the comforting thought that no matter how much pain they inflict on their people, they will still be feted in England.” The invitation to the king comes after the organisers of the Windsor event agreed to adopt a human rights policy following a complaint that the show is being exploited by the Bahrain royal family to distract from rights abuses. The death of Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, president of the UAE, on Friday may, however, persuade the king to fly back to the Gulf at short notice. Not only will the Gulf state’s king be present at Windsor but Bahrain’s Prince Nasser has also confirmed he will be attending. In 2014 the high court in London ruled that Prince Nasser bin Hamad Al Khalifa was not immune from prosecution over torture claims, allegations the Bahraini government categorically denied. Since the failed 2011 uprising, aimed at removing the ruling monarchy, Bahrain has been engaged in the repression of its Shia majority. Human rights groups claim the regime is using mass terrorism trials and the removal of citizenship to crack down on peaceful activists. Amnesty International’s latest assessment of Bahrain says that its government continued to commit serious human rights violations, “including torture and other ill-treatment as well as suppression of freedom of expression and assembly. Official investigations of ill-treatment resulted in impunity for perpetrators.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T20:08:37Z'}, {'id': '627d20458f08e6ce3a77da3e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Shot after shot pounded into the Russian missile battery hidden by the lighthouse on Snake Island, a Black Sea rock 22 miles (35km) from the Ukrainian coast. The edited video, released by the Ukrainian military, showed the strike and its aftermath – all taken from a Turkish-designed Bayraktar TB2 drone. Until then, evidence of the TB2 – a remotely piloted killer drone with a range of up to 190 miles – had largely disappeared from the conflict. The assumption was that the two dozen or so that Ukraine had bought from Turkey had been shot down and Ankara, not wanting to upset Russia, had declined to supply more. Yet the battle for control of Snake Island suggested the picture had changed. A day later, another TB2 video, accompanied by the pumping music typical of these propaganda releases, showed a landing craft being destroyed; a day after that, the downing of an Mi-8 helicopter as Russian troops were disembarking. Death from a distance, shown on social media video. An aviation analyst, Amelia Smith, spotted that one of the drone videos indicated the drone had a new registration: T253 – not seen in Ukraine before. It had been spotted being tested in late March around the manufacturer’s test facility in Turkey, suggesting it was newly supplied, perhaps part of a new batch. One week on, Russia said it had shot down nine TB2 drones, which cost somewhere between $1m (£820,000) to $2m each, plus several other uncrewed aircraft, in the battle for Snake Island. While that claim is hard to verify, control of the territory is still being contested, for all the videoed strikes. The TB2s are clearly militarily effective – and are used for all their propaganda worth. But it is not obvious they are militarily decisive. The point is not lost on Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who said in April: “With all due respect to Bayraktar, and to any hardware, I will tell you, frankly, this is a different war.”\nThe 11-week conflict – in which Russia’s invasion has stalled after capturing most of the south coast and some of the east of the country – has become, since the abortive attempt to take Kyiv, largely a battle of tanks and artillery in which both sides exchange heavy and often unguided fire as they fight over increasingly small amounts of territory.\nThis is not to suggest that drones are irrelevant. However, it reflects in part the reality that for both sides, the larger armed drones – the TB2s on the Ukrainian side and Russia’s nearest equivalent, the Orion drone - have not been present in large numbers and once eliminated are not easy to replace. Sam Bendett, a drone expert with the US Center for Naval Analyses thinktank, said the Ukrainian military had taken advantage of the fact that Russia did not control all the airspace and that it did not have persistent electronic warfare defences “with some very accurate and significant strikes”. But he added: “What is needed from their perspective is to do so on a much larger scale.” Russia knew it needed to counter the TB2 from the 2020 war between Armenia and Azerbaijan in Nagorno-Karabakh, in which Azerbaijan used Turkish drones to knock out Armenia’s Russian-designed tanks and gain a decisive advantage.\nMoscow had long lagged behind in drone technology, said Douglas Barrie, an aerospace analyst at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. “Russia is having to play catchup. They have underinvested in this area since the early 1990s, just as they underinvested across the board,” he said. Moscow started deploying Orion combat drones in Ukraine in March, followed almost immediately by reports one had been shot down. “They went into the war with a limited supply, the consequence of decisions made years ago; perhaps with two or three dozen Orions, instead of having a larger number,” Bendett said. Ukraine has wasted little opportunity in trying to demonstrate the homespun nature of Russian drones: videos of a downed Orlan 10 reconnaissance drone being taken apart show it relies on a consumer Canon DSLR camera with key buttons glued into position and, for its fuel tank, parts of a water bottle, including the screw-on top. “No original part” was made in Russia, the Ukrainians conclude in the video, and the true cost of the drone was estimated at $3,000 rather than the $80,000 to $120,000 official cost. It is probably a reasonable estimate, but in reality, even Turkish TB2 drones have relied on off-the-shelf components to keep costs down and the pace of manufacturing up. Meanwhile, as the war becomes increasingly attritional, and armed drones are knocked out of the sky, new drones are coming to the fore. The US has agreed to supply to Ukraine at least 700 of the less sophisticated single-use, or kamikaze, Switchblade 300 and 600 drones, with a range of six or 25 miles, loitering munitions that can hang in the sky and smash down, with fearful effect on their target.\nSwitchblades have started to arrive on the frontline – a Ukrainian video from a week ago purports to show a Russian position struck from above, followed by soldiers fleeing in terror. But again, although the number of kamikaze drones appears large, the stockpile may be quickly depleted as the war continues. Prof Peter Lee, a drones expert at Portsmouth University, said that in a war where “no side has control of the air” the most significant use of drones has instead been for “intelligence gathering and situational awareness – exactly what aircraft were first used for 100 years ago”. Each side has made heavy use of simple, commercially available drones for reconnaissance, with videos frequently released into the public domain, such as an edited montage of footage of a Russian armoured column being ambushed in Brovary, east of Kyiv, in March. Drone footage of artillery shelling, attacks on armoured vehicles and other fighting on both sides have become a routine feature of the war.\nSuch has been the demand for simple camera drones that China’s DJI, the world’s largest manufacturer, chose in April to suspend sales of its easy-to-use drones to Ukraine and, more surprisingly, to Russia – although it is unclear if the ban will have a meaningful effect. One expert has estimated that Ukraine is operating as many as 6,000 reconnaissance drones on the battlefield. “Drones are not a war-winning technology,” Lee said. “But they are a war-enabling technology, and what we have seen is Ukraine responding in a quicker and more agile way.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T16:10:54Z'}, {'id': '620ff5f48f086f7273b88808', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than one million people have died in the Covid-19 pandemic in the US, far and away the most deaths of any country. While the sheer number of deaths from the coronavirus sets the US apart, the country’s large population of 332.5 million people does not explain the staggering mortality rate, which is among the highest in the world. For every 100,000 residents, 303 people have died from Covid-19, according to the Johns Hopkins University Coronavirus Resource Center. Among the 20 worst affected nations, only one other countries – Brazil – has higher mortality rates per 100,000 people. Deaths directly attributable to Covid-19 are only one measure of the pandemic’s toll. Deaths from drug overdoses hit a record high in 2021, killing at least 100,000 Americans. Chronic conditions such as heart disease, hypertension and dementia have contributed to the number of “excess deaths” – a number which includes other ailments exacerbated by the pandemic, as well as those deaths caused directly by Covid-19. This number crossed the one million threshold in mid-February. The extraordinary toll has set the US apart among wealthy, peer nations, exposing inequality, a unique and fragmented health system, and polarized politics – all of which likely made the crisis worse, researchers said. “In terms of understanding why we had such a bad experience from the pandemic, we have to think about the systemic issues that already were in place when the pandemic arrived,” said Steven Woolf, a social epidemiologist and population health researcher at Virginia Commonwealth University. “And, on top of that, mishandling of the pandemic by the government and by the public, frankly.” The pandemic shone a light on longstanding racial and ethnic health disparities, as Black, Latino and Native American people were infected, hospitalized and died of Covid-19 at rates that were, at times, double those of white Americans. The drivers of those outcomes – the disproportionate likelihood for people of color to lack the same quality housing, employment and healthcare access as white Americans – are well known and documented. Such disparities are the “intended or unintended consequences of policy decisions”, a recent commentary in the Journal of the American Medical Association said.\nThe US has nonetheless had difficulty correcting course. Vaccines were at first slow to reach minority, low-income and rural areas. One recent study has shown how at least one advanced Covid-19 therapy, monoclonal antibodies, were the least likely to reach the highest risk patients for whom they are recommended. “It just exacerbated the struggles we currently have and pulled back the curtain on all the issues we’ve been dealing with for so many years,” said Terrence Shirley, CEO of the Community Health Center Association of Mississippi. Community health centers help treat indigent and marginalized Americans who cannot pay for healthcare. The all-consuming nature of the pandemic has also allowed preventable and treatable infectious diseases to flourish. Thousands of young children, particularly in low-income households, have fallen behind on routine vaccinations. Rates of sexually transmitted diseases have reached the “highest numbers in American history”, as overwhelmed and underfunded local health agencies reallocated resources to Covid-19. Meanwhile, the mental health of adolescents in particular has suffered, as millions were cut off from the mental health services provided by schools. Pediatricians, children’s hospitals and psychiatrists declared a mental health crisis among the nation’s youth, and a recent CDC study has shown how emergency room visits for eating disorders has increased dramatically among adolescent girls. Millions of children were also thrust into food insecurity, as the numbers of children receiving school meals plummeted. Missed academic time appears to have caused the educational achievement gap to widen. “The US has been experiencing worse health outcomes for some years now. Life expectancy in the US is the lowest of any high income country,” said Woolf. “There’s a set of reasons for it, but all of those rolled right into the pandemic.” However, America’s reliance on an expensive, private and exclusionary health system is not solely to blame. Although policies that exclude 28 million uninsured individuals from healthcare have likely made things worse, they are only one example of how fragmented policy has worsened Americans’ health. Concepts fundamental to US governance also proved problematic in the pandemic. In just one example, the US Constitution makes public health the responsibility of individual states, creating a patchwork of different pandemic responses. Culture and environment also appear played a role. Americans are more likely than citizens of other countries to engage in what public health researchers consider risky behavior, such as gun ownership, smoking, consuming more calories and exercising less. Polarized politics make it more difficult to implement guardrails on these behaviors. Floundering responses by federal, state and local governments compounded existing issues, and eventually allowed pandemic-related public health guidance to become political and cultural footballs. Less than two-thirds of Republicans have received at least one dose of the Covid-19 vaccine, compared with 91% of Democrats, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation’s January 2022 vaccine tracking poll. The only thing both parties appear to agree on, according to the same poll, is how the pandemic has exhausted them. That has led to another riddle – as more and more pandemic prevention measures are dropped, Americans will be faced with how to live with a disease that can be chronic and disabling, even if it isn’t as deadly. “Death is not the only serious outcome from Covid,” said David Putrino, the Director of Rehabilitation Innovation for Mount Sinai Health System. Putrino has seen thousands of cases of so-called “long Covid”, where many varied and at times severe symptoms persist for months. A recent analysis by the Center for American Progress found the syndrome resulted in an estimated 1.2 million more disabled people in 2021. “We are addressing the acute illness,” said Shirley, “and not resolving the issues that could prevent the illness in the first place”. This article was amended on 16 May 2022 to correct that Johns Hopkins has not yet estimated one million deaths in the US as originally stated. Other sources are currently reporting the figure. Other figures were also updated to reflect the latest findings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T14:58:41Z'}, {'id': '62599cbe8f08a3f8f35ebc39', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the middle of the night on 20 August last year, Gordon Robertson received a phone call from the Florida highway patrol. The officer had pulled over his brother, Bruce, who was disoriented and claimed he was coming to see him. “I’m thinking, that’s really odd: I had told him he was not allowed to come up here and visit until he got vaccinated,” said Gordon, 71, who lives in Longwood. “I asked him a dozen times, ‘Bruce, you gotta get this. You gotta get this.’ And he wouldn’t do it.”\nIt was the beginning of a story that highlights the impact of the Covid-19 tragedy in the US. From social distancing to vaccine disagreements or an inability to visit people who were sick in the hospital, a common symptom of the pandemic was human separation – sometimes permanent, in the case of the roughly 1 million Americans that Covid has now killed. Many of those losses have been especially hard precisely because of the separations involved – not only because family and friends couldn’t be with victims before they died but also because many couldn’t go through the usual grieving rituals afterwards. According to experts who study grief, the toll of the virus counts not just the 1 million deaths, but the immeasurable isolation that accompanied them. And for the people who died unvaccinated by choice, the sorrow among those who knew them was tempered by frustration that the deaths could have been prevented. In Bruce Robertson’s case, his life before Covid was the opposite of isolated. He lived in Lakeland, Florida, and worked for AT&T for years before he retired. He would walk several miles each day and was in good health, his brother recalled. He volunteered in the kitchen at a Seventh-day Adventist church, feeding homeless people. And he watched The Jim Bakker Show. A streaming program hosted by the infamous televangelist, it falsely touted “silver solution” as a cure for Covid. Bruce concluded that he didn’t need the vaccine. “He said, ‘I’m going to live to 100,’” Gordon recalled. So Gordon politely insisted that he not visit until vaccinated – which made the phone call from Florida highway patrol so baffling. The officer drove Bruce home, Gordon said, and the next day a friend went to Bruce’s house to discover a lawnmower in the middle of the yard. Bruce answered the door not fully clothed. Inside, food was spoiling on the kitchen counter. The friend called 911. At the hospital, Bruce was diagnosed with Covid. A nurse told Gordon that his brother’s delirium was a symptom of the virus, and that it was common among infected older adults. Bruce insisted to Gordon that he had a little cough but otherwise felt fine. “He said, ‘I hate it here. There’s no sports on TV,’ and that’s the last thing he said to me,” Gordon said. The next day the nurse told Gordon that his brother was on oxygen. A day later, the nurse said he had a blood clot in one of his lungs. They could intubate him but he would be in intense pain. The family agreed to just make him comfortable.\nGordon has mixed feelings about not seeing his brother before he died: his stepson also had health issues, and he felt he needed to protect him. “I just couldn’t take the chance that [Bruce] might have” the virus, Gordon said. “I felt kind of guilty, that maybe I should have seen him before he got sick. But it was kind of his choice, and I couldn’t do anything about that. You can’t make people do what they don’t want to do.” Adapting to Covid deaths had been made exponentially harder, experts said, because people couldn’t watch their loved ones die. Geraldine Smith, whose husband died before vaccines were available, has spent much of the pandemic trying to educate people in St Louis about the virus and vaccines. Her husband, Carl, was a pastor who founded New Beginning Missionary Baptist church in North St Louis county in 1997 while also working as a police detective; he had started a narcotics training program for local teachers and parents. “My husband was a pastor who met the people where they were,” including in the streets, Smith said. On 29 March 2020, the pastor was delivering a sermon online when Smith noticed sweat pouring from his brow. She didn’t feel well, either. “After he completed his sermon, I told him, ‘Something’s wrong,’ ” Smith recalled. They went to ER and were tested for Covid, but it took two days to get the results. Doctors discharged Geraldine but kept Carl because his heart was racing. On the third day, after his heart rate returned to normal, she returned to take him home. Carl told her, “I’ve lived a good life.” “I kept wondering why he said that to me,” she said.\nA couple of days later, her own condition worsened. She called 911 and an ambulance brought her to Christian hospital in north St Louis county. “I stayed there for 25 days, and I did not know that I was in this world,” she recalled. Doctors eventually woke her up from an induced coma, and told her that Carl had died. “It was devastating – but the reason why it was so devastating was that I was not able to be with him,” Smith said. Smith’s reaction has been a common one during the pandemic, said Mary-Frances O’Connor, a psychologist who researches grief at the University of Arizona. “Many people have not been able to spend time at the bedside in a hospital or long-term care facility, and that is very unusual for human beings – not to be able to provide that care,” O’Connor said. “People I have been doing research with just tell me, ‘It feels like it hasn’t sunk in. She was here, and now she’s not here, and I didn’t get to see anything in between.’” Smith eventually came to terms with it as best she could. She continues to experience fatigue and short-term memory loss but now works at Show Me Hope, a crisis counseling program – and said she now understands why her husband told her he had lived a good life. “He had done his work, and God had said, ‘It’s time. Come on home and get your rest.’ God makes those decisions, and I accepted God’s decision,” she said. Kim Bell saw multiple deaths a week. A nurse at Saint Anne’s hospital in Fall River, Massachusetts, she had plenty of experience with death from working in a cancer unit. “No one is ready in America” to die, said Bell, 58. “But it doesn’t have to be bad. I always say to people, ‘I can make sure your dad is comfortable. I am more worried about you.’ It’s a whole family thing.” When the pandemic struck, the hospital converted her unit for Covid patients. They started losing about five patients a week, she said. Bell and many of her colleagues became depressed. Her doctor prescribed her an antidepressant, which she said helped. A Journal of General Internal Medicine study published in December found that among 500 doctors, nurses and first responders surveyed, 74% reported symptoms of depression; 37% reported symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder; and 15% reported thoughts of suicide or self-harm. “I don’t know what being a soldier is like, but it really did feel like being a soldier. You were exhausted, scrappy, dirty, sad, overworked. You never knew what you were going to walk into,” said Bell, who also felt like she was “barely a parent” to her two children, one of whom also grew depressed.\nJust as Bell tried to help cancer patients’ families, she tried to do the same for Covid patients. One 53-year-old Portuguese woman who ended up in Bell’s unit stood out. “It was like going to see a friend,” Bell recalled. The woman had not been vaccinated because her son and daughter-in-law didn’t believe in it, she said. When she was eventually put on oxygen, the woman was “sweaty, panting and just looked scared”, Bell said. “More than once I heard her say, ‘My kids lied to me. They lied to me,’” about the vaccine. She did not survive. Later, when Bell spoke with the woman’s family, she said, “Please, for your mother’s sake – as a tribute to her – get your whole family vaccinated. Because she does regret it.” These days, Bell does not have many Covid patients. She no longer needs the personal protective equipment used throughout the pandemic. And she no longer is depressed. “It just feels so much easier. We can breathe again,” Bell said of not needing all the PPE. “I don’t know how I got used to not breathing for those long days.” For Gordon, things are not much easier. His brother’s death still feels unresolved. “The thing missing from my brother’s death was the absence of closure,” Gordon said. “It seemed, and continues to seem, unreal. No family gathered to say goodbye, no memorialization due to Covid restrictions.” The terrible strangeness of it was only underlined when another tragedy struck the family. In January of this year, his wife Linda’s son, Stephen, died in his chair while watching television. He was 50 years old. The family suspects a heart attack. They are planning a memorial service to celebrate Stephen’s life, Gordon said – while in his brother’s case, there was only a small service at his church, which Gordon didn’t find out about until later. He wouldn’t have gone anyway, he said: it was the height of the Delta surge. Today, he has a third dog: his stepson’s. When his neighbors would remark on the new companion, and he told them the sad story, he learned four of them had also lost their adult children. People dropped off food and cards. “It makes neighbors become real neighbors again, which kind of was a lost art for a while – probably because of the pandemic,” Gordon said. As a semi-retired consultant for car dealerships, he continues to hear stories – about salespeople, parts department workers and office staff who have died. “It’s just been an awful couple years,” he said. “I don’t think people realize that every one of that ‘million’ number is attached to two, four, 20 people – so you’re talking 50 million people. “Who knows how many people this affected?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T19:39:07Z'}, {'id': '627fa7888f08493b6168cba8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was Nina’s 88th birthday, and she marked it by leaving behind everything she had known. Volunteers, not particularly young or fit themselves, carried her down three flights of stairs from her flat, past the irises about to bloom in her neighbour’s patch of garden. Apartment buildings hid the ruins of the local school, destroyed last week by a Russian missile, but the war intruded on the yard anyway, the regular thump of distant artillery echoing through the sunny afternoon. This corner of Donbas is one of the few parts of Ukraine still threatened by an advancing army, and fear has largely emptied the town of Konstiantynivka of its families. Defeated in Kyiv, pushed back from Kharkiv, Moscow has thrown its anger and many extra troops into long stretches of the eastern front. Targets are pulverised by artillery and airstrikes, then Russian soldiers move forward a few miles and declare the “liberation” of places such as Popasna – more ruin than town when it was captured, survivors say. “There is no Popasna now,” said Oleh, a construction worker who had tried to ride out the fighting in a basement shelter with his family until their own home was hit. “Even when you look at photos and videos, your brain can’t understand what you are seeing. It’s hard to know that this is where you lived.” Residents of places that might be next have been urged by government and relatives to leave while it is still possible, advice that many heeded weeks ago. Driving through the region is a journey through ghost towns, with empty streets of shuttered shops, deserted homes and abandoned parks. An eerie quiet interrupted only by air raid sirens or explosions hangs over these half-abandoned communities – from Bakhmut, the last major Ukrainian-held outpost before the frontline at Popasna, west to Kramatorsk, site of a bloody attack on civilians waiting for an evacuation train, or south through Druzhkivka to Konstiantynivka.\nOnly the hospital trauma wards are bustling, filled with the terrible shrapnel wounds of a war waged mostly by rocket and artillery, bringing severed limbs and lacerated bodies. Those who gambled on staying – hoping the Russians won’t arrive or their homes won’t be hit – are mostly the old, the sick and the poor, who can’t physically leave, fear they can’t afford to live somewhere else, or simply can’t face starting again somewhere new so late in life. “I’m too old for this,” said Oleksandr, 67, his face crumpling into tears as he waited to be driven away from his home of 33 years, with his wife, Tanya, 64. He is a stroke survivor who can barely walk, and his daughter had badgered the couple into accepting an evacuation offer from Druzhkivka before they become trapped there by a rain of Russian shells. “I’m a little scared,” Tanya admitted. “We’ve been hearing heavy bombing for a week now, there was one last night.” As she waved goodbye to a few hold-out neighbours, all retirees like themselves, one woman in sandals asked how she could get on the list for a ride. Like so much of the civilian response to the Russian invasion, this evacuation is an unlikely and improvised effort run by volunteers willing to risk their lives for strangers. They help those who are too ill to leave in ordinary cars, or can’t afford to pay for their own travel, or are daunted by the logistics of fleeing across a country at war.\nVlad is driving the lead car, finding addresses given to him by a local Ukrainian charity, Vostok SOS, and reassuring the evacuees. Mark Poppert, an American who has left his home in Doha to volunteer with the UK-based charity, Refugease, is at the wheel of a van that serves as a rudimentary ambulance for evacuees who can’t sit up. They have already called at Druzhkivka to collect Oleksandr and Tanya; now the makeshift convoy has arrived in Konstiantynivka. Poppert wears a Stetson as a nod to his Nebraskan roots. “So the Ukrainians know they have international support,” he says, although it is unclear how many locals pick up on the gesture of solidarity. The two men use Google Translate to communicate, because they have no shared language to manage their urgent shared mission. Russian bombs are not the only threat residents of these small towns are trying to balance. The pressures of war have thrown daily life into chaos and made people vulnerable in other ways. Nina and her daughter Irena, 60, were both being treated for cancer at Kramatorsk hospital, but with the Russian advance their doctors left and the oncology ward was shuttered. Nina’s grandson Anatoly, 43, is disabled and Irena is clearly frantic with worry about what the interruption to her treatment could mean for him.\n“We had no relatives to help us organise healthcare,” said Irena. “My mother is paralysed and can’t talk, but we couldn’t even get any painkillers. We are going to Dnipro now: someone said they will help us get into hospital there.” After Nina is carried down the stairs by their rescuers, she is laid carefully on a bedding roll spread on the floor of Mark’s van, her head protected by pillows, for the two-hour drive to a special evacuation train leaving from Pokrovsk. Signs in the windows read “invalids”, more for the railway guards than for Russian attackers. When the convoy arrives, everyone on the platform is slightly nervous, after last month’s strike on nearby Kramatorsk station. For many of those climbing on board, this escape from immediate danger will be the most painful but straightforward step in a long and difficult journey towards some kind of new life. Also in Vlad’s car are Irina, five months pregnant, and her nine-year-old daughter Amina. “I was afraid to be alone with a child on the way, they said the town was being encircled and we should leave,” said Irina, after making a final reading of the gas meter and handing the key of her rented flat over to her landlady. She leaves behind an aunt who is like a mother to her, a job at a local gas company, and – like all the others who are going – the only place she has ever called home. Pregnant and with a child, she is striking out into the unknown with little more than a phone number of a friend in Poland. “She said we could stay, I’ll call her when I get near Warsaw and she will give me the exact address,” she said. Charities have been warning about the trafficking of women like Irina, vulnerable and alone, as they cross into Europe.\nThe risks of this journey into the unknown is one reason some stay near the frontline. “We have relatives in the west, but we don’t have any job. How will we support ourselves when we get there?” said Oleh, who drove his wife, son, daughter-in-law, two granddaughters and their cat through heavy shelling to Bakhmut. After the intense battle for Popasna, the ghost towns of Donetsk seem like something of a haven, and they have free beds in a shelter, so they plan to stay in Bakhmut for now, despite a steady increase in shelling. “One recent hit was on a student dormitory. Children had been playing there half an hour before, but fortunately they had just left,” said Bakhmut deputy mayor Maksym Sutkovyi. He estimates that at least a third of the town’s prewar population of about 100,000 have stayed, a number swelled by people escaping from fighting to the east. “Of course I’m worried: we understand that the war in its next phase can come here,” he said, but he plans to stay, along with the rest of the town council. “Those who stay need basic living conditions, and we have to maintain critical infrastructure … people will better support our army and country if we are here.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-15T11:33:38Z'}, {'id': '5037bd23-0f0c-402d-8ec0-c9a095c6ed3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Saturday night, far from the ruins that were once homes and the battlefields that were once cities, Ukraine secured an emphatic victory that had nothing to do with rifles, antitank weaponry or Molotov cocktails, and everything to do with hopeful words, folkloric dance moves and a continental eruption of cultural solidarity. Following the Kalush Orchestra’s triumph in the 2022 Eurovision song contest, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he hoped next year’s final would take place in the besieged port city of Mariupol, which has endured some of the most merciless onslaughts of the Russian invasion. “Our courage impresses the world, our music conquers Europe! Next year Ukraine will host Eurovision!” Zelenskiy said in a Telegram post. “We will do our best to one day host the participants and guests of Eurovision in Ukrainian Mariupol. Free, peaceful, rebuilt! I am sure our victorious chord in the battle with the enemy is not far off.” Kalush Orchestra’s entry, Stefania – a rap-folk hybrid originally intended as a tribute to the mother of frontman Oleh Psiuk – swiftly proved a rallying cry in Ukraine and beyond. As the song’s lyrics, which include the lines “I’ll always find my way home, even if all roads are destroyed”, found new resonance, the group rededicated it to all Ukraine’s mothers. Many Ukrainians felt Stefania’s triumph had provided a much-needed psychological boost after almost three months of war. In a basement north of Kyiv, a group of soldiers watching the event also dared hope that next year’s final would be in Mariupol. “We had a victory – today in Eurovision, but soon we will have a victory in Ukraine-Russian war,” said Tetyana, a military medic, standing in the basement decorated with children’s paintings of the Ukraine flag and “Glory to Ukraine” signs. The tired-looking but happy soldiers had sat around a screen, some tapping rhythmically on their knees while Kalush performed, and when the winner was announced they clapped and cheered with delight. “We will also win,” said Vitaliy, another soldier. “We have shown that we can not only fight, but we can also sing very nice. The next Eurovision we will host in liberated Mariupol.” For Mykola Latsiuk, a bartender in Kyiv, the band’s decision to take part in the contest was more important than their victory. The six men who make up the group had received special permits to leave Ukraine and travel to Italy during the war. “The most important thing is that the guys went and performed,” said Latsiuk. “They supported us, and we supported them. It is important.” The track’s success will also live on in the name of a train that runs between Kyiv and Ivano-Frankivsk. The head of the railway service announced on Sunday that the number 43 train would be renamed the Stefania Express, and that stations in Kyiv, Kalush and Ivano-Frankivsk would play the song when the train rolled in.\nKalush released a new music video for the track on Sunday, which showed Ukrainian servicewomen rescuing children from shelled and ruined towns. Psiuk’s mother, the eponymous Stefania, said she had been startled by her new-found celebrity and by the requests for photos when she went to her local market. “I didn’t connect it to myself – that the song was written for me,” she said. “I thought someone had made a mistake and meant his girlfriend Sasha and got the names mixed up.” Psiuk’s sister Iryna described watching the final with her mother in the band’s home town of Kalush, which lies in the foothills of the Carpathian mountains in Ukraine’s western Ivano-Frankivsk region. “She was really worried,” said Iryna. “We wept. We sat up until half past six, watching the press conference … Emotions were off the scale, we didn’t believe that our little town of Kalush would bring Ukraine victory this year in the Eurovision.” Psiuk himself took advantage of the global stage to make an impassioned plea to free the fighters still trapped beneath the sprawling Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol. “Help Azovstal, right now,” he said. The European Broadcasting Union, which organises the contest, said no action would be taken against the band for using the stage to make a statement. “We understand the deep feelings around Ukraine at this moment and believe the comments of the Kalush Orchestra and other artists expressing support for the Ukrainian people to be humanitarian rather than political in nature,” the EBU said.\nStefania had been bookmakers’ favourite among the 25 competing performers in the grand finale. The public vote from home, via text message or the Eurovision app, proved decisive, lifting them above the British TikTok star Sam Ryder, who led after the national juries in 40 countries cast their votes. The 439 fan votes is the highest number of televote points ever received in a Eurovision contest, now in its 66th year. Psiuk thanked the Ukrainian diaspora “and everyone around the world who voted for Ukraine”, adding: “The victory is very important to Ukraine. Especially this year.” Psuik told journalists the group wanted to “show that Ukrainian culture and Ukrainian music are alive, and they have their own and very special signature”. One of the band’s original members had stayed to fight, while the others will be back in Ukraine in two days when their temporary exit permit expires.\nBefore traveling to Italy, Psiuk was running a volunteer organisation he set up early in the war that uses social media to help find transport and shelter for people in need. “It’s hard to say what I am going to do, because this is the first time I win Eurovision,” he said. “Like every Ukrainian, I am ready to fight and go until the end.” Reuters and the Associated Press contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-15T17:39:58Z'}, {'id': '62804c158f083b856379ac03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This blog is now closed but our live coverage will resume again in a few hours. Until then you can catch up with all our stories on the war here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-15T00:42:01Z'}, {'id': '6280323e8f083b856379ab88', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A large convoy of hundreds of cars and vans carrying refugees from the ruins of Mariupol arrived in the Ukrainian-controlled city of Zaporizhzhia on Saturday night after waiting days for Russian troops to allow them to leave, Reuters reports. Mariupol, now mostly Russian-controlled, has been flattened during the 80-day-old war. Ukraine has gradually been evacuating civilians from the devastated city for more than two months.\nRefugees first had to get out of Mariupol and then somehow make their way to Berdyansk – 50 miles further west along the coast – and other settlements before the 125-mile drive northwest to Zaporizhzhia. Nikolai Pavlov, a 74-year-old retiree, told Reuters he had lived in a basement for a month after his apartment was destroyed. A relative using “secret detours” managed to get him out of Mariupol to Berdyansk. “We barely made it, there were lots of elderly people among us. The trip was devastating. But it was worth it,” he said after the convoy arrived in the dark. An aide to Mariupol’s mayor had earlier said the convoy numbered between 500 to 1,000 cars, representing the largest single evacuation from the city since Russia’s 24 February invasion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T23:04:14Z'}, {'id': '62802f088f083b856379ab7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more of Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s comments from his Instagram post tonight recalling his earlier meeting with US politicians, including the Senate minority speaker Mitch McConnell. Zelenskiy said he was especially grateful for Joe Biden signing into law this week an update to the second world war era Lend-Lease act, which allows for faster production and delivery by the US of weapons and munitions to allies engaged in conflicts it is not itself a direct participant: I believe that this visit once again demonstrates the strength of bipartisan support for our state, the strength of ties between the Ukrainian and American nations. I expressed gratitude for the historic decision to renew the Lend-Lease program. I called for the official recognition of Russia as a terrorist state. More and more countries around the world are realizing that Russia, by blocking the Black Sea for us and continuing this war, puts dozens of other countries at risk of a price crisis in the food market and even famine. This is another incentive for our anti-war coalition to act more decisively together.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T22:48:21Z'}, {'id': '628028078f08e6ce3a77f2c9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ambassador to the US Anatoly Antonov says his country’s diplomats in Washington DC are being threatened with violence and harassed by US intelligence services, Reuters is reporting, citing the Tass news agency of Russia.\nAntonov told Russian TV on Saturday that face-to-face meetings with US officials ended on 24 February, the day of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and that his staff were facing an impossible situation: It’s like a besieged fortress. Basically, our embassy is operating in a hostile environment. Embassy employees are receiving threats, including threats of physical violence. Agents from US security services are hanging around outside the Russian embassy, handing out CIA and FBI phone numbers, which can be called to establish contact. Reuters said the CIA, the FBI, the office of the director of national intelligence and the US state department did not immediately return messages seeking comment. Russia’s ambassador to Poland, Sergey Andreev, was pelted in red paint by war protestors at a VE day commemoration in Warsaw on Monday. Reuters notes that Russia and the US were already in dispute over the size and functioning of their respective diplomatic missions before Russia invaded Ukraine. Moscow expelled a number of US diplomats in March after Washington said it was kicking out 12 Russian diplomats at the country’s UN mission in New York.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T22:20:49Z'}, {'id': '62801e868f08493b6168cf2b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Saturday thanked a slew of US politicians for coming to Kyiv, and warned that the situation in the eastern Donbas region, under an onslaught from the Russian military, “remains very difficult”. Zelenskiy was speaking in a series of Instagram videos released on the 80th day of Russia’s invasion. The visit by US Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell and a small group of Republican senators, the latest in a growing list of US politicians coming to the Ukraine capital, was a powerful signal of bipartisan support for his country, he said.\nHe added that his discussions with McConnell, and a delegation including Republicans Susan Collins of Maine, John Barrasso of Wyoming and John Cornyn of Texas, covered a range of topics, including repeating his call for Russia to be designated a terrorist state: We discussed many areas of support for our state, including in defence and finance, as well as strengthening sanctions against Russia. Earlier, he praised the politicians directly for their visit: Thank you for your leadership in helping us in our struggle not only for our country, but also for democratic values and freedoms. We really appreciate it. Russia is committing genocide against the Ukrainian people. [Russian president Vladimir Putin] commits war crimes that horrify the whole world – torture, mass executions, rape. Europe has not seen such crimes since world war two. Their trip came as a $40bn US military, economic and humanitarian aid package remains stalled in the Senate over demands issued by the Kentucky senator Rand Paul for a watchdog to track the spending. Moscow’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, told Russian TV on Saturday that closer American cooperation with Ukraine was “extremely dangerous”, Reuters reported: The US is getting dragged ever deeper into a conflict with the most unpredictable consequences for relations between the two nuclear powers. Meanwhile, in a Saturday night Instagram post, Zelenskiy blasted Russia’s continued assault on the Donbas region as “insane”: The situation in Donbas remains very difficult. Russian troops are still trying to show at least some victory. On the 80th day of the full-scale invasion, it looks especially insane, but they do not stop all these efforts. I am grateful to everyone who holds the line and brings closer to Donbas, Pryazovia and Kherson the same thing that is happening now in the Kharkiv region. Step by step we are forcing the occupiers to leave our land. We will make them leave the Ukrainian sea as well.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T21:55:42Z'}, {'id': '628011e08f08e6ce3a77f252', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s foreign minister Annalena Baerbock said Saturday that Russia must take responsibility for the damage caused by its invasion of Ukraine, CNN reports.\nBaerbock was speaking at the concluding press conference at the G7 meeting of foreign ministers in Berlin, at which the group also warned millions could starve if Russia does not lift its Black Sea blockade of Ukrainian grain exports. Germany has been one of the most outspoken countries at the summit, with Baerbock slamming Russia’s “illegal war”: Russia is solely responsible, not only for this war, which is contrary to international law, but also for all this massive damage, which is also massive in Russia itself. The Canadian foreign minister Melanie Joly said on Saturday that her country could legally use Russian money seized by sanctions to pay for the damages, CNN said. But Baerbock said Europe’s legal framework made it more difficult: Access to frozen money is legally anything but simple. When we put people on sanctions lists, we have to ... provide explanations for them so that they are also valid before the European court of justice. That applies all the more to this path, if we were to take it, for which there are some good reasons. It must of course be such that it stands up before our law; we are defending international law. Read my colleague Daniel Boffey’s report on the G7 summit here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T21:15:01Z'}, {'id': '628018048f083b856379ab16', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s midnight on Sunday in Kyiv after the 80th day of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Here’s what we’ve been following: The US Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, joined the growing list of US politicians making visits to Kyiv. The Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy welcomed McConnell’s visit as a powerful signal of bipartisan support for Ukraine. Finland’s president, Sauli Niinistö, told Vladimir Putin Helsinki plans to join Nato. Niinistö delivered the news during a phone call with the Russian leader. In response, Putin said abandoning neutrality would be a mistake and that there are no current threats to Finland’s security. Russia has described Helsinki’s bid to join Nato as a hostile move that “definitely” would represent a threat – to which Moscow will respond. Ukraine says Moscow is planning to hold a referendum, perhaps as early as Sunday, on whether Mariupol wants to become part of Russia. It follows news of a similar poll in Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia and allegations from western allies that Russia is planning sham referendums to justify military actions. Russian troops have withdrawn from the Kharkiv city area, its mayor, Ihor Terekhov, said. He said that, “due to the efforts of Kharkiv territorial defence and Ukrainian armed forces, the Russians have withdrawn out far from the city area in the direction of the Russian border”. The war will be over by the end of 2022, Ukraine’s head of military intelligence said. Major general Kyrylo Budanov claimed Moscow was suffering heavy casualties and predicted a turning point by mid-August – adding his belief that “most of the active combat actions will have finished by the end of this year”. Moscow is failing to reach its political aims in Ukraine, the UK’s Ministry of Defence (MoD) said. The fact Russia has only succeeded in imposing a pro-Russia local leadership in the city of Kherson “highlights the failure of Russia’s invasion to make progress towards its political objectives”, the latest intelligence update said. “Very difficult negotiations” on the next stage of evacuations from Mariupol were ongoing, Zelenskiy said. The city’s last remaining Ukrainian defenders are holed up in the Azovstal steel plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T21:09:49Z'}, {'id': '628016348f083b856379ab0e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s Kalush Orchestra made a plea for the city of Mariupol and its besieged Azovstal steel plant at the end of their appearance in the Eurovision 2022 song contest. The group’s lead singer Oleh Psiuk made the comments at the conclusion of its performance in Turin of the song Stefania, Reuters reports. Ukraine is a heavy favourite to win this year’s competition: Please help Ukraine, Mariupol. Help Azovstal right now. In a video address released before the event, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he believed the Kalush Orchestra would win. Follow our live blog of the Eurovision song contest here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T20:57:44Z'}, {'id': '62800d418f08e6ce3a77f234', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is denying Ukraine’s claim that it damaged a navy support ship in a missile strike in the Black Sea, Reuters is reporting. The Russian defence ministry published online photographs it said were taken of the auxiliary vessel Vsevolod Bobrov in the Crimean port of Sevastopol on Saturday. “It is now clear from the photographs that the ship is not damaged at all,” a statement accompanying the images claimed. On Thursday, military authorities in Ukraine’s southern Odesa region said its navy had made a direct hit on the Vsevolod Bobrov, setting it alight, and stating Russia had “lost” the 95-metre logistics vessel. Last month the missile cruiser Moskva, flagship of Russia’s Black Sea fleet, sank after catching fire. Ukraine said it hit the ship with a missile fired from the coast, while Moscow blamed an ammunition explosion. It emerged earlier this month that the US shared information about the Moskva’s location with Ukraine prior to its sinking.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T20:26:44Z'}, {'id': '627ffdf78f083b856379aa8e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a selection of images from Ukraine on Day 80 of Russia’s invasion. In Irpin:\nIn Dnipropetrovsk:\nIn Bucha:\nIn Kyiv:\nIn Lysychansk:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T19:48:05Z'}, {'id': '627ffea08f08493b6168ce79', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow is preparing to hold a referendum in Mariupol on whether the city will join Russia, Ukrainian officials have claimed, following the announcement of a similar poll in Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia. Petro Andryushchenko, an adviser to the port city’s mayor, who is operating in exile, said sources among those remaining among its ruins believed a vote on its future was in the making, even as residents were going without food and water. The ruins left of Mariupol, a sea resort once home to 400,000 people, are largely occupied by Russia, although as many as 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers are holding out in the sprawling Azovstal steelworks by the port in the face of remorseless shelling. Andryushchenko told the Observer that an announcement of a referendum could come as early as Sunday, although he said there was no evidence yet of polling stations being established: We have some information that the Russian authorities are preparing a referendum and could even call it tomorrow, but we don’t know yet if this is the case. But we see lots of integration of Mariupol into the Russian system, the education system, the banking system. South Ossetia leader Anatoly Bibilov had announced on Friday he would hold a referendum on joining Russia on 17 July, claiming “we are coming home” and citing his people’s “historic aspiration” to join Russia. Moscow’s initial plan to seize the whole of Ukraine failed after they lost the bloody battle of Kyiv. The Kremlin has since focused on securing a swathe of land around the east and south-east of the country. Read more:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T19:16:19Z'}, {'id': '627ff30a8f08e6ce3a77f16d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Relatives of wounded Ukrainian soldiers holed up in a besieged steel plant in the port city of Mariupol have been talking with the US news network CNN, saying: “Our children are in hell.” Earlier today, Turkey proposed carrying out a sea evacuation of hundreds of wounded fighters from the Azovstal plant in the city under Russian control, although Moscow has not yet agreed to the plan. Speaking with CNN, Stavr Vishnyak, whose son Artem, 21, is among the cut-off Ukrainian troops, called on Turkey and China to facilitate the safe removal of the fighters before it was too late: Our children are in hell. We ask the world community again and again to make the extraction procedure. The petition to save Mariupol has collected one-and-a-half million signatures. We have already reached out to everyone. Only Xi Jinping remained. We ask [the] president of China to mediate, intervene and become a peacemaker in this war. Our heroes have almost no time left. Our warriors have already been to hell. Give them the opportunity to step on the earth and see the sun. A number of civilians who were sheltering in the steelworks were evacuated earlier this month with the help of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the UN. Under the Turkish plan, evacuees would be taken by land to the port of Berdyansk on the Sea of Azov, and be picked up by a Turkish vessel that would take them across the Black Sea to Istanbul. Ukraine has not commented on a possible sea evacuation, but the country’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said talks were under way to evacuate a large number of wounded soldiers from the steelworks in return for the release of Russian prisoners of war. According to CNN, a Ukrainian soldier inside the plant described horrific and unsanitary conditions for the wounded on Ukrainian TV on Saturday: Fighters are simply lying without limbs, without arms, without legs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T18:51:46Z'}, {'id': '627fef098f083b856379aa21', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Observer’s Jon Ungoed-Thomas has been looking at how fraud at Russia’s National Bank Trust could end up helping to fund the country’s war in Ukraine, and how the film star Bruce Willis inadvertently got caught up in the scheme: In one of Russia’s most high-profile marketing campaigns, film star Bruce Willis appeared in cinematic advertisements with a car chase and a rooftop rescue, ending with the slogan, “Trust is just like me, but a bank.” The campaign for National Bank Trust in 2011 – which included cardboard cutouts of Willis popping up in 400 branches across Russia – was credited with raising the bank’s profile and boosting business. Ministers are now under pressure to impose sanctions on the bank over its efforts to recover hundreds of millions of pounds in debts from the UK. A decade ago, money was pouring in to the bank’s coffers from clients and large chunks were sent around the world in loans for a network of offshore companies. But it was subsequently alleged that the elaborate corporate structure incorporated fake documents and was a fraudulent scheme that concealed bad debts and enriched key executives.\nWillis, whose family announced earlier this year he had the neurological disorder aphasia, had no knowledge of the alleged scheme. The high court in London ruled in January 2020 that the bank was owed $900m (£735m) compensation from three former bosses, two settled in Britain, allegedly involved in the scheme. The bank is now seeking to recover money owed in the UK, but ministers face questions on whether sanctions will stop it getting the cash. National Bank Trust is now majority owned by the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, so any money recovered in Britain could flow back to the Russian state. Christine Jardine, the Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesperson, said: There are too many question marks around the National Bank Trust and whether it is, in fact, able to channel funds to the Putin regime. We need crystal-clear answers about whether it is able to raise foreign cash, that the Kremlin is so desperate for, and send it back to Russia. Read the full story:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T18:15:21Z'}, {'id': '627fe7f38f08e6ce3a77f118', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Slovakia is weighing in on plans by Finland and Sweden to join Nato. The country’s foreign minister, Ivan Korčok, told reporters on Saturday he is confident all 30 member states of the alliance will welcome them. Arriving for the gathering of Nato leaders in Berlin, Korčok said Slovakia was “absolutely ready” to support admission of the two Nordic nations, Reuters reports. He was also asked how long the allies were willing to support Ukraine’s efforts to repel the Russian invasion: Until they win. Russia has lost this war politically, it has achieved the contrary which Russia wanted to achieve.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T17:50:26Z'}, {'id': '627fe1858f083b856379a9ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good afternoon, good evening, or good morning, depending on where you are. It’s Richard Luscombe in the US, and I’ll be guiding you through the next few hours. Retired lieutenant general Mark Hertling, former commander of the US Army in Europe, has retweeted a video apparently showing an undisciplined Russian tank crew in Mariupol running over civilian vehicles, presumably for their own amusement. Hertling says he would court martial the occupants. The translation from the Ukrainian text in the original tweet reads: “The garbage that captured Mariupol for fun shoots houses and crushes the cars of locals with tanks. It is obvious that the Russians came not to defend, but to rob, kill and destroy. Defenders do not behave this way”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T17:20:12Z'}, {'id': '627fdf578f08e6ce3a77f0da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Norway on Saturday backed plans of Finland and Sweden to join Nato against criticism from Turkey. Norwegian foreign minister Anniken Huitfeld said as she arrived for a meeting with her Nato counterparts in Berlin: We don’t know what Turkey really means but from [the] Norwegian perspective, we are 100% behind Finland and Sweden if they decide to apply for membership in Nato. This will also strengthen the Nordic cooperation because we chose differently after World War 2, so I think that this is a historic moment right now. Dutch foreign minister Wopke Hoekstra echoed her, and said it was important that all Nato members showed unity, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T17:01:50Z'}, {'id': '627fda3f8f083b856379a97d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has denied responsibility for rising food prices and the risk of a global hunger crisis, and has reacted sharply to such accusations by German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock. Writing on her Telegram channel on Saturday, Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blamed rising prices on Western sanctions, dpa reports. “If you don’t understand that, it’s either a sign of stupidity or deliberately misleading the public,” she told Baerbock. Another reason for the global food crisis is, according to Zakharova, the collapse of Ukraine’s statehood, for which she also holds the west responsible.\n“One of the reasons for this is the predecessors of Ms Baerbock, who not only interfered in the situation in the country, but also shaped Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy by hand,” Zakharova claimed. Baerbock had previously expressed concerns about an imminent global famine at the Baltic Sea G7 meeting, and had accused Russia of blocking Ukraine’s seaports and thus preventing grain exports. Ukraine is one of the most important grain producers in the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T16:52:28Z'}, {'id': '627fd46b8f08493b6168cd20', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The foreign ministers of Finland and Turkey will meet in Berlin later on Saturday to try to solve disagreements over Finland’s and Sweden’s plan to join Nato, Finnish foreign minister Pekka Haavisto said. He told reporters he was “confident that in the end we will find a solution and Finland [and] Sweden will become members of Nato” as he arrived for a meeting of Nato foreign ministers in Berlin, adding he had spoken to his “good colleague” Mevlut Cavusoglu by phone on Friday. Referring to a phone call initiated by Finland’s president to Vladimir Putin, Haavisto said it was “very important that we communicate with our neighbour” even if “we don’t ask any permission for our political steps”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T16:52:50Z'}, {'id': '627fd3008f08493b6168cd15', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People fleeing the war in Ukraine are being put up with UK hosts who have not had a criminal record check, it has emerged, adding to concerns about the government’s response to the refugee crisis. 46,100 Ukrainians have so far arrived in the UK, and in many cases, people have been housed for weeks by hosts who still are waiting for their Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) checks. My colleagues Mark Townsend and Anna Fazackerley have more.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T16:09:49Z'}, {'id': '627fce368f08e6ce3a77f025', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Portugal has blocked the sale of a €10m mansion belonging to Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich, Publico newspaper said on Saturday. The property registry of the mansion in the luxury Quinta do Lago resort in the Algarve was frozen so the ownership cannot change on 25 March at the request of the foreign ministry, according to the report. The sanctioned former Chelsea owner tried to sell the property 15 days before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine began through the Delaware-based Millhouse Views LLC, owned by his investment holding.\nPortugal’s largest bank, Caixa Geral de Depositos, alerted authorities, the newspaper said. The bank declined to comment, and a spokesperson for Abramovich did not respond to phone calls and messages from journalists. Abramovich has been sanctioned by the British government, the EU and Switzerland over his links to Russian president Vladimir Putin, an allegation which he denies. He was granted Portuguese citizenship last year based on a law offering naturalisation to descendants of Sephardic Jews who were expelled from the Iberian peninsula during the mediaeval Inquisition.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T16:02:00Z'}, {'id': '627fc8398f083b856379a8f0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey has proposed carrying out a sea evacuation of hundreds of wounded fighters holed up in a steel plant in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol, president Tayyip Erdoğan’s spokesman and top foreign policy adviser, Ibrahim Kalin, said on Saturday. Mariupol is under Russian control, and a number of civilians who were sheltering in the steel works were evacuated earlier this month with the help of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the UN. Kalin told Reuters he had personally discussed the proposal with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Kyiv two weeks ago and that it remained “on the table” although Moscow had not agreed to it. Under the plan, evacuees would be taken by land to the port of Berdyansk on the Sea of Azov, and be picked up by a Turkish vessel that would take them across the Black Sea to Istanbul, he said. “If it can be done that way, we are happy to do it. We are ready. In fact our ship is ready to go and bring the injured soldiers and other civilians to Turkey,” Kalin said. Ukraine and Russia did not immediately comment on the possibility of an evacuation by sea. Zelenskiy has said complex talks were under way to evacuate a large number of wounded soldiers from the steel works in return for the release of Russian prisoners of war. Kalin said the Russian position “changes day to day”. Turkey objected to Russia’s invasion and has supplied Kyiv with armed drones, but opposes western sanctions on Moscow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T15:44:20Z'}, {'id': '627fc17e8f08e6ce3a77efd4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That’s it from me for today. Thanks for reading. I’m handing you over to my colleague Jedidajah Otte, who’ll take you through the next few hours. Here’s a summary of the day’s main developments: The US Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, joined the growing list of US politicians making visits to Kyiv. The Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy welcomed McConnell’s visit as a powerful signal of bipartisan support for Ukraine. Finland’s president Sauli Niinistö told Vladimir Putin Helsinki plans to join Nato. Niinistö delivered the news during a phone call with the Russian leader. In response, Putin said abandoning neutrality would be a mistake and that there are no current threats to Finland’s security. Russia has described Helsinki’s bid to join Nato as a hostile move that “definitely” would represent a threat – to which Moscow will respond. Russian troops have withdrawn from the Kharkiv city area, its mayor Ihor Terekhov said. He said that, “due to the efforts of Kharkiv territorial defence and Ukrainian Armed Forces, the Russians have withdrawn out far from the city area in the direction of the Russian border”. The war will be over by the end of 2022, Ukraine’s head of military intelligence said. Major general Kyrylo Budanov claimed Moscow was suffering heavy casualties and predicted a turning point by mid-August – adding his belief that “most of the active combat actions will have finished by the end of this year”. Moscow is failing to reach its political aims in Ukraine, the UK’s Ministry of Defence (MoD) said. The fact Russia has only succeeded in imposing a pro-Russia local leadership in the city of Kherson “highlights the failure of Russia’s invasion to make progress towards its political objectives,” the latest intelligence update said. “Very difficult negotiations” on the next stage of evacuations from Mariupol were ongoing, Zelenskiy said. The city’s last remaining Ukrainian defenders were holed up in the Azovstal steel plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T15:03:11Z'}, {'id': '627fbb558f08493b6168cc50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hungary’s president, Katalin Novák, has condemned Russia’s invasion and said her first trip will take her to Poland – an apparent gesture to mend relations with Warsaw – during her inauguration ceremony. Reuters reports that Hungary’s refusal to send weapons shipments to neighbouring Ukraine and its opposition to a planned EU embargo on Russian oil imports has weighed on relations between Budapest and Warsaw, whose two nationalist governments have long been allies in the EU. Novák, a former Fidesz party lawmaker and an ally of the prime minister, Viktor Orbán, was elected to the largely ceremonial post of president in March – shortly before Orbán won another landslide victory in elections on 3 April. Hungary’s first female president, Novák has served as deputy chair of Fidesz and was family affairs minister in Orbán’s previous government. During her inauguration speech, she said: On Tuesday, 17 May, I am travelling to Warsaw to meet the president of the Polish people. Mr President, dear Andrzej (Duda), I thank you for the opportunity to talk as befits friends. We condemn Putin’s aggression, the armed invasion of a sovereign state. We say eternally no to every effort aiming at the restoration of the Soviet Union. She said the war in Ukraine was also “fought against us peace-loving Hungarians”, adding that Hungary demanded that war crimes be investigated and punished.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T14:34:19Z'}, {'id': '627fb4d28f08e6ce3a77ef5b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, has joined the growing list of US politicians making visits to Kyiv, it has emerged. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, welcomed McConnell’s visit as a powerful signal of bipartisan support for Ukraine. McConnell led a delegation, which included Republican senators Susan Collins of Maine, John Barrasso of Wyoming and John Cornyn of Texas, to the Ukrainian capital, where he was hosted by Zelenskiy.\nIn remarks and video posted on Instagram on Saturday, Zelenskiy told the visitors Ukraine was defending not only its own state but all democratic values and freedoms and the right of people to freely choose their own future. Thank you for your leadership in helping us in our struggle not only for our country, but also for democratic values and freedoms. We really appreciate it. Russia is committing genocide against the Ukrainian people. [Putin] commits war crimes that horrify the whole world – torture, mass executions, rape. Europe has not seen such crimes since world war two. The visit comes as a $40bn US military aid budget has stalled in the Senate over demands issued by the Kansas senator Rand Paul for a watchdog to track the spending. In a rare bipartisan request, McConnell and the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer – a Democrat – offered Paul a vote on his amendment to the package. That offer was rejected, with Paul saying he wanted changes to the underlying bill.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T14:21:37Z'}, {'id': '627fb08b8f08e6ce3a77ef1b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Prof Gavin Brown, pro vice-chancellor at Liverpool University, first made contact with academics at Sumy State University (SSU) in north-eastern Ukraine a few weeks ago, he did not expect to come off the call and start ordering new windows. One of SSU’s main buildings had been destroyed in a Russian bomb attack. Among the university’s many immediate needs, it had to replace 110 windows – but managers could not source glass in war-torn Ukraine. Brown told them to send him the measurements. Liverpool is one of 44 British universities that have signed up in recent weeks to “twin” with a struggling Ukrainian university. UK academics say the weekly Zoom meetings, slotted in around air raid sirens, with female staff who have fled calling in from across Europe, are “humbling” and “emotional”. The idea is to make sure that when the war with Russia ends, Ukraine’s universities will still exist, so their staff and students can help rebuild the battered country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T14:15:56Z'}, {'id': '627fa93f8f083b856379a7c6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey has not shut the door to Sweden and Finland joining Nato, but wants negotiations with the Nordic countries and a clampdown on what it sees as terrorist activities especially in Stockholm, a spokesman for the president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has said. Ibrahim Kalın, who is also the president’s top foreign policy adviser, has told Reuters: We are not closing the door. But we are basically raising this issue as a matter of national security for Turkey. Erdoğan surprised Nato members and the two Nordic countries seeking membership by saying on Friday it was not possible for Turkey to support enlarging the alliance because Finland and Sweden were “home to many terrorist organisations”, the news agency reports. Any country seeking to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization needs the unanimous support of the members of the alliance. The United States and other member states have been trying to clarify Ankara’s position. Stockholm is widely expected to follow Helsinki’s lead and could apply for entry to the 30-nation alliance as early as Monday. But Kalın has said the militant Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK) – designated a terrorist organisation by Turkey, the United States and the European Union – was fundraising and recruiting in Europe and its presence is “strong and open and acknowledged” in Sweden in particular. What needs to be done is clear: they have to stop allowing PKK outlets, activities, organisations, individuals and other types of presence to ... exist in those countries. Nato membership is always a process. We will see how things go. But this is the first point that we want to bring to the attention of all the allies as well as to Swedish authorities. Of course, we want to have a discussion, a negotiation with Swedish counterparts.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T14:09:50Z'}, {'id': '627fa4548f08e6ce3a77eed5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces are on the counteroffensive near the Russian-held town of Izyum, Reuters reports, citing the governor of the Kharkiv region. The news agency calls the move a striking at a key axis of Russia’s assault on eastern Ukraine and notes that a major and successful counteroffensive on that Russian line of advance would deal a serious setback for Moscow in the battle for the Donbas, a region in Ukraine’s east that Russia has said it wants to capture completely. Moscow’s forces have been trying to fight their way south from the town of Izyum, the northern part of a Russian pincer movement aimed at outflanking battle-hardened Ukrainian forces dug in to defend the eastern frontline. The regional governor, Oleh Sinegubov, has said: The hottest spot remains the Izyum direction. Our armed forces have switched to a counteroffensive there. The enemy is retreating on some fronts and this is the result of the character of our armed forces. In a possible shift in momentum in the war, Ukraine has been recapturing territory in its north-east, driving Russia away from the second-largest Ukrainian city of Kharkiv in their fastest advance since Moscow’s troops pulled away from Kyiv. Ukrainian forces destroyed parts of a Russian armoured column as it tried to cross a river in the Donbas, video from Ukraine’s military showed on Friday, and its defence minister predicted many weeks of grinding fighting ahead.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T13:40:52Z'}, {'id': '627fa2198f08493b6168cb87', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is claiming the west has announced a “total hybrid war” against Russia and says it is hard to predict how long it will last. He said everyone would feel the consequences of this war, Reuters reports. Efforts by the west to isolate Russia are doomed to fail, Lavrov claims; a reference to sanctions over Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T12:49:09Z'}, {'id': '627fa0268f083b856379a792', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Relatives of Ukrainian soldiers trapped in Mariupol’s Azovstal steel plant are calling on China’s president, Xi Jinping, to save the encircled troops, saying he’s the last world leader that Moscow would listen to, Agence France-Presse (AFP) reports. The agency says: Five wives of the Ukrainian soldiers and one father gave a press conference in Kyiv, in another desperate appeal to help the soldiers, holed up in the underground tunnels of the huge factory that has been besieged by Russian forces for weeks. ‘There is only one man left in the world that we can address, it is the Chinese leader,’ said Stavr Vychniak, the father of one of the trapped soldiers. ‘China has a big influence on Russia and on (Russian president Vladimir) Putin personally. We ask for him to intervene,’ he sad. He called on Xi to ‘take necessary measures for the extraction’ of the soldiers. ‘They are in hell, under constant bombardment,’ he said, calling on wounded soldiers and bodies of dead soldiers to be removed from the plant. Western powers and Ukraine have repeatedly urged China to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine while Beijing, which has good relations with Moscow, has tried to maintain a neutral stance. Natalia Zarytska, the wife of one of the trapped soldiers, also called for China’s help. ‘There is still a person in this world to whom Putin struggles to say no to,’ she said, calling on Xi to ‘join in to save’ the soldiers. ‘We are confident that China, strong and noble, is able to take decisions difficult in the name of good.’ Zarytska said she receives messages from her husband, saying they are under attack ‘from sea, ground and air’ and that Russia is dragging out ‘this painful process of torture.’ She called on the world ‘not to be silent and stop this destruction’ at Azovstal. Ukraine’s Azov battalion that has led the defence of Mariupol has posted desperate videos from he plant, saying soldiers are ‘dying’ from their wounds there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T12:46:33Z'}, {'id': '627f95118f08e6ce3a77ee6d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has told Finnish president Sauli Niinistö that abandoning Finnish neutrality would be a mistake and that there are no security threats to Finland, Reuters reports. Reuters is citing the Russian state-owned Ria news agency.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T12:04:57Z'}, {'id': '627f90898f08493b6168cb01', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Finland’s president, Sauli Niinistö, told Vladimir Putin about Helsinki’s plans to join Nato by phone, Reuters reports. Russia has said Finland’s bid to join Nato was a hostile move that “definitely” posed a threat to its security, to which it will respond.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T11:50:52Z'}, {'id': '627f8e858f08493b6168caef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The major of Kharkiv, Ihor Terekhov, has told the BBC that Russian troops have withdrawn from the Kharkiv city area. He said that “due to the efforts of Kharkiv territorial defence and Ukrainian Armed Forces, the Russians have withdrawn out far from the city area in the direction of the Russian border”. He added that it was now “calm in Kharkiv and people are gradually coming back to the city”. There was “no shelling in the city for the last five days”, he said, explaining that there was only “one attempt” from Russian forces to hit the city with a missile rocket near Kharkiv airport. But, he said, “the missile was eliminated by Ukrainian Air Defence”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T11:36:04Z'}, {'id': '627f88788f08e6ce3a77ee23', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a little more detail on the joint statement issued by the G7 nations, which Agence France-Presse (AFP) reports have vowed never to recognise the borders Russia is trying to redraw and have pledged enduring support for Kyiv. After three days of talks in northern Germany, the foreign ministers said: We will never recognise borders Russia has attempted to change by military aggression, and will uphold our engagement in the support of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including Crimea, and all states. They also vowed to expand sanctions to include sectors on which Russia is dependent, and keep supplying Ukraine with weapons to help it repel Russia’s invasion. We reaffirm our determination to further increase economic and political pressure on Russia, continuing to act in unity. Western countries have supplied Ukraine with artillery, anti-aircraft missiles, anti-tank weapons and other powerful material, but Kyiv has been pushing allies for more support. As the war drags on, G7 foreign ministers also highlighted the growing impact of the war on poorer countries, especially in regard to food security. AFP reports that ministers also criticised Belarus over its stance on the war. We ... call on Belarus to stop enabling Russia’s aggression and to abide by its international obligations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T11:07:19Z'}, {'id': '627f84bd8f083b856379a6df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian Su-27 fighter jets have taken part in drills to repel a mock airstrike on Russia’s Kaliningrad enclave, the Interfax news agency reports, citing the Baltic Sea fleet. The drills took place two days after Finland announced plans to apply to join Nato, with Sweden likely to follow; moves that would bring about the expansion of the western military alliance that Putin has said he aims to prevent. The Russian Baltic Sea fleet’s press service said Su-27 fighter jets “destroyed” the planes of the simulated adversary during the drills, Interfax reports, adding that more than 10 crews of the Baltic Sea fleet’s Su-27 were involved in the exercises.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T10:57:22Z'}, {'id': '627f81b28f08e6ce3a77ee06', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Foreign ministers from the G7 group of nations have vowed to reinforce Russia’s economic and political isolation, continue supplying weapons and work to ease global food shortages stemming from the war in Ukraine, Reuters reports, citing a joint statement. We reaffirm our determination to further increase economic and political pressure on Russia, continuing to act in unity.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T10:18:40Z'}, {'id': '627f792a8f083b856379a690', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The war will be over by the end of the year, Ukraine claims, while a UK intelligence assessment suggests Moscow is failing to make progress towards its political objectives. And, in the battle for Ukraine’s second largest city, a US thinktank believes it is Kyiv’s forces that are prevailing. So what’s the situation on the ground right now?', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T10:56:34Z'}, {'id': '627f7d168f08493b6168ca8e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Efforts at the Azovstal steelworks are now focused on evacuating about 60 people, comprising the most seriously wounded as well as medical personnel, Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk has told local TV. Reuters reports that many of those still in the plant are members of the Azov Regiment. Its deputy commander Sviatoslav Palamar has previously said his forces would continue to resist as long as they could. He told an online forum streamed on YouTube: Our enemy, supported by planes and artillery, continues to attack. They continue their assault on our positions but we continue to repel them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T10:04:21Z'}, {'id': '627f79088f08493b6168ca73', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T10:56:45Z'}, {'id': '627f753e8f083b856379a681', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There should be consensus at Nato for Sweden and Finland to join the alliance, but their accession should also be quick, Reuters quotes the Canadian foreign minister, Mélanie Joly, as saying. It is important that we have a consensus. We wish that there not only be an accession of Finland and Sweden, but a quick accession, which is fundamental in the circumstances as Finland and Sweden are looking for security guarantees.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T09:45:50Z'}, {'id': '627f63748f083b856379a645', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Interfax quotes Grushko as saying: It will be necessary to respond ... by taking adequate precautionary measures that would ensure the viability of deterrence. He also reiterated the Kremlin’s earlier statement that Moscow’s response to Nato’s possible expansion would depend on how close the alliance moves military assets towards Russia and what infrastructure it deploys. Finland’s plan to apply for membership, announced on Thursday, and the expectation that Sweden will follow, would bring about the expansion of the western military alliance the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, aimed to prevent.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T08:18:38Z'}, {'id': '627f57fa8f08e6ce3a77ed57', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia will act if Nato deploys nuclear forces and infrastructure closer to its border, the state-run RIA news agency quotes deputy foreign minister Alexander Grushko as saying. Grushko claims to have no hostile intentions towards Finland and Sweden and to see no “real” reasons for those two countries to join the defence alliance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T07:22:14Z'}, {'id': '627f4cb38f08e6ce3a77ed41', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 700,000 people fleeing the war in Ukraine have been recorded in Germany thus far, Welt am Sonntag newspaper has reported, citing interior ministry data. Since the start of the war on 24 February until 11 May, 727,205 people have registered in Germany’s central register of foreigners (AZR), of which 93% hold Ukrainian citizenship, Welt reported, according to Reuters. A significant number may have travelled on to other European Union countries or returned to Ukraine, it said.\nAround 40% of Ukrainian refugees were minors and women make up 81% of the adult refugees registered, Welt added. The Russian invasion has triggered a massive displacement of people, including more than 8 million Ukrainians within the country, according to the latest International Organization for Migration (IOM) report. The number of people who have fled Ukraine has passed 6 million, in Europe’s worst refugee crisis since the end of the srcond world war, a UN refugee agency said on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T07:42:20Z'}, {'id': '627f314a8f083b856379a5ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In case you’d missed it, Italy is set to host the Grand Final of the Eurovision song contest later on Saturday – and Ukraine is the favourite to win. Kalush Orchestra, a band that blends traditional folk and hip-hop, is competing in the event with the song Stefania, which has become an anthem at home, the Guardian’s Rome correspondent Angela Giuffrida reported earlier this week.\nWritten by frontman Oleh Psiuk as a tribute to his mother, Stefania is also the most watched on YouTube among the 35 contenders. But in an interview with the Italian news agency Ansa, Psiuk said his band’s entry was tipped to do well even before Russia invaded in February. “Some people are saying we could win because of the war, but our song was among the five favourites before the start of the conflict, which means people like it regardless,” he said. Russia has been banned from competing this year. Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T06:42:08Z'}, {'id': '627f4a9b8f08e6ce3a77ed39', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine already has 40 suspects and 11,000 cases in its war crimes investigation, prosecutor general Iryna Venediktova has said. I am confident that in the nearest future we will see other cases being transferred to courts and perpetrators appearing before judges. We will ensure that these cases are brought to their logical end. Her comments came after Kyiv heard its first war crimes trial since the invasion began in February. Vadim Shysimarin, a commander of the Kantemirovskaya tank division, is accused of shooting dead an unarmed man on a bicycle, after being ordered “to kill a civilian so he would not report them to Ukrainian defenders”, according to prosecutors.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T06:31:10Z'}, {'id': '627f44758f083b856379a5ea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The war against Russia will reach a turning point by mid-August and be over by the end of the year, Ukraine’s head of military intelligence has told Sky News. Major general Kyrylo Budanov said: The breaking point will be in the second part of August. Most of the active combat actions will have finished by the end of this year. As a result, we will renew Ukrainian power in all our territories that we have lost including Donbas and the Crimea. He said Russia was suffering huge losses – although he would not be drawn on Ukrainian casualties – and said he was not surprised by their scale, given Russian power was a “myth”. Europe sees Russia as a big threat. They are afraid of its aggression. We have been fighting Russia for eight years and we can say that this highly publicised Russian power is a myth. It is not as powerful as this. It is a horde of people with weapons. Budanov said Russian forces attacking the north-eastern city of Kharkiv had been pushed back almost to the Russian border and that their much-reported failure to cross the Siverskyi Donets river several days ago had resulted in “heavy losses”. I can confirm that they suffered heavy losses in manpower and armour and I can say that when the artillery strikes happened many of the crews abandoned their equipment. He also claimed that Russian defeat in Ukraine would lead to the removal of Russian president Vladimir Putin and that a coup was already under way against him. “They are moving in this way and it is impossible to stop it,” he said. He provided no evidence to support the claim. Furthermore, Putin was in a “very bad psychological and physical condition and he is very sick”. Rumours of Putin’s ill health have circulated recently but the Guardian has been unable to substantiate them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T06:18:52Z'}, {'id': '627f3faa8f083b856379a5e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fact that Russia has only succeeded in imposing a pro-Russia local leadership in the city of Kherson “highlights the failure of Russia’s invasion to make progress towards its political objectives in Ukraine,” the UK’s Ministry of Defence (MoD) has said in its latest intelligence update. The Russian-controlled administration in Kherson said it planned to request annexation by Moscow on Wednesday. Russia occupied Kherson in March and seized its city council building in late April. The occupation was met with protests by residents, despite violent attempts by Russian forces to disperse them. The MoD said a central part of Russia’s original invasion plan had highly likely been to “use rigged referendums to place the majority of Ukraine’s regions under long-term pro-Russian authority.” If Russia carries out an accession referendum in Kherson, it will almost certainly manipulate the results to show a clear majority in favour of leaving Ukraine. Citizens in the Kherson region are likely to continue to demonstrate their opposition to Russian occupation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T08:22:07Z'}, {'id': '627f2ee98f08e6ce3a77ecd8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'India is banning wheat exports in a bid to protect the country’s food security, the government has said. The “sudden spike” in global wheat prices put the food security of India, neighbouring and other vulnerable countries at risk, the Directorate General of Foreign Trade said. Ukraine is a major exporter of wheat and other food products. Its invasion by Russia has sparked warnings of a global food crisis. G7 foreign and agricultural ministers are currently meeting in Germany to discuss ways of breaking Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian grain exports from ports including Odesa. Before the war, most of the food produced by Ukraine – enough to feed 400 million people – was exported through the country’s seven Black Sea ports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T05:50:03Z'}, {'id': '627f3c5f8f083b856379a5ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Senior Russian lawmaker Anna Kuznetsova visited the Russian-occupied region of Kherson in Ukraine to discuss social and healthcare needs of the local population, the state RIA news agency reported on Saturday according to Reuters. There have been sparse confirmed reports of Russian senior officials visiting areas of fighting since Russia invaded its neighbour on 24 February. Kherson is the first region set to be annexed after Moscow said in April it had gained full control of the region, which has seen sporadic anti-Russian protests.\nKuznetsova, deputy head of Russia’s Duma or lower house of parliament, discussed the supply of foodstuffs as well as medical and other products needed for children, RIA reported. “We are here ready to provide all kinds of assistance,” Kuznetsova, the wife of an Orthodox priest and mother of seven was quoted saying. The agency did not report when the visit took place. Reuters could not independently verify the report. Kherson, home to a port city of the same name, provides part of the land link between the Crimean peninsula, which Russia seized from Ukraine in 2014, and Russian-backed separatist areas in eastern Ukraine. The Kremlin said it was up to residents living in the region to decide whether they wanted to join Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T06:33:40Z'}, {'id': '627f395b8f08493b6168c9a0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces in the Kharkiv region have not been engaging in active combat, the Ukrainian general staff has said in its latest update on the conflict. Their main efforts were instead “focused on ensuring the withdrawal of troops from the city of Kharkiv, maintaining occupied positions and supply routes.” In the southern port city of Mariupol, Russia was continuing to blockade the last remaining Ukrainian forces in the Azovstal steel plant, it said, and was using “mass artillery and air strikes”. In the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk Ukrainian forces had repelled ten Russian attacks and destroyed equipment including five tanks, five artillery systems, and six units of combat armoured equipment, the general staff said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T05:20:11Z'}, {'id': '627f36108f08493b6168c992', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Very difficult negotiations” are underway on the next stage of evacuations from Mariupol and the Azovstal steel plant, where the city’s last remaining Ukrainian defenders are holed up, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said in his latest nightly address. We do not stop trying to save all our people from Mariupol and Azovstal. Currently, very difficult negotiations are underway on the next stage of the evacuation mission - the rescue of the seriously wounded, medics. It is a large number of people. Of course, we are doing everything to evacuate everyone else, each of our defenders. Everyone in the world who can be the most influential mediator has already been involved in the relevant negotiations. Russian forces have intensified their bombardment of steelworks, where many of the fighters are thought to be injured. Recent evacuees have described hellish conditions in the network of underground bunkers there.\nZelenskiy also warned that the war and Russia’s blockade of Ukraine’s ports were “provoking a large-scale food crisis”. Russian officials are also openly threatening the world that there will be famine in dozens of countries. And what could be the consequences of such a famine? What political instability and migration flows will this lead to? How much will you have to spend then to overcome the consequences? These are the questions that need to be answered by those who are delaying sanctions on Russia or trying to postpone aid to Ukraine. His warning came as G7 foreign and agriculture ministers were meeting in Germany to discuss ways of breaking the Russian blockade of grain exports.\nZelenskiy also claimed that Russia had lost almost 27,000 soldiers, “many of them young conscripts”, and that Ukraine had downed a 200th Russian military aircraft. Russia had also “lost more than three thousand tanks, armored combat vehicles, a large number of conventional military vehicles, helicopters, drones and all its prospects as a state.” And why all this? For a monument to Lenin to stand in the temporarily occupied Henichesk for a little longer? There is no other result for Russia and there will not be any. The Guardian is not able to verify Ukraine’s claims regarding Russian losses and Moscow has provided very little detail.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T13:19:32Z'}, {'id': '627f2df98f083b856379a5a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has “likely won the battle of Kharkiv”, the country’s second largest city, the Institute for the Study of War has said in its latest assessment of the conflict. Ukrainian forces prevented Russian troops from encircling, let alone seizing Kharkiv, and then expelled them from around the city, as they did to Russian forces attempting to seize Kyiv. Russian units had “generally not attempted to hold ground against counterattacking Ukrainian forces over the past several days, with a few exceptions.” Reports from Western officials and a video from an officer of the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR) indicate that Moscow is focused on conducting an orderly withdrawal and prioritizing getting Russians back home before allowing proxy forces to enter Russia rather than trying to hold its positions near the city. The US-based think tank said Ukraine would now likely “attempt to disrupt ground lines of communication (GLOCs) between Belgorod [in Russia] and Russian forces concentrated around [the Russian-occupied city of] Izyum, although Russia is using several GLOCs, including some further away from current Ukrainian positions than any Ukrainian counteroffensive is likely to reach soon.” Russian troops had “made no progress” with an attempted ground offensive from Izyum, it continued, adding: “We had previously hypothesized that Russia might give up on attempts to advance from Izyum, but the Russians have either not made such a decision or have not fully committed to it yet.” Meanwhile, it said, the main Russian effort was aimed at encircling the cities of Severodonetsk and Lysychansk in Luhansk. Russian troops attacking from Popasna to the north made no significant progress in the last 24 hours. Russian forces coming north-to-south have failed to cross the Siverskyi Donets River and taken devastating losses in their attempts. The Russians may not have enough additional fresh combat power to offset those losses and continue the offensive on a large enough scale to complete the encirclement, although they will likely continue to try to do so. Other key takeaways included: Russian forces have likely secured the highway near the western entrance to the Azovstal Steel Plant but fighting for the facility continues. Russian forces in Zaporizhia Oblast are likely attempting to reach artillery range outside Zaporizhia City. Ukrainian forces are reportedly attempting to regain control of Snake Island off the Romanian coast or at least disrupt Russia’s ability to use it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T04:51:57Z'}, {'id': '627f297d8f083b856379a593', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As the time approaches 8am in Kyiv, here’s a round up of the latest developments. Ukraine has “likely won the battle of Kharkiv”, the country’s second largest city, the Institute for the Study of War has said in its latest assessment of the conflict. “Ukrainian forces prevented Russian troops from encircling, let alone seizing Kharkiv, and then expelled them from around the city, as they did to Russian forces attempting to seize Kyiv,” the US-based thinktank said. Ukrainians have also repelled multiple attempts by the Russians to cross a strategically significant river in the Donbas, inflicting heavy losses in the process, according to local officials and British intelligence. British defence intelligence said Russia had lost “significant armoured manoeuvre elements” from a battalion tactical group – a formation with about 800 personnel at full strength – from the failed effort to cross the Siversky Donets River, 12 miles (20km) west of Severodonetsk. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy says “very difficult negotiations are underway” on the evacuation of the seriously wounded and medics from Mariupol and the city’s Azovstal steel plant, which Russian forces continue to bombard. “Of course, we are doing everything to evacuate everyone else, each of our defenders,” the president added. Russia will suspend electricity supplies to Finland from 1am on Saturday the supplier, RAO Nordic, said, amid rising tensions over Helsinki’s bid to join Nato. That news came as US president Joe Biden expressed his support for the right of Finland and Sweden “to decide their own future, foreign policy, and security arrangements” in a call with his Finnish counterpart, Sauli Niinistö, and Sweden’s prime minister, Magdalena Andersson. The White House also said it was ‘working to clarify Turkey’s position’ after president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said that Turkey would not welcome either Sweden or Finland joining Nato. The comments appeared directed at the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which Turkey regards as a terrorist organisation. Sweden has a large Kurdish diaspora. Earlier, the Ukrainian president reiterated an offer to hold direct talks with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, in the Ukrainian president’s fullest public comments on the prospect of peace talks in weeks. “I am ready to talk to Putin, but only to him. Without any of his intermediaries. And in the framework of dialogue, not ultimatums,” he told Italy’s RAI 1 television. A Russian soldier has appeared in court accused of murdering an unarmed man on a bicycle, at the start of the first war crime trial in Ukraine since the invasion began. Vadim Shysimarin, a commander of the Kantemirovskaya tank division, is charged with the premeditated murder of a 62-year-old man. The case is scheduled to resume on Wednesday. Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia will hold a referendum on joining Russia on 17 July, the region’s leader, Anatoly Bibilov, has announced. South Ossetia was at the centre of the Russian-Georgian war in 2008 after which the Kremlin recognised the territory – along with another separatist region, Abkhazia – as an independent state and stationed military bases there. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said Kyiv hopes to arm a million people as the country prepares for a “new, long phase of war”. He warned that “extremely tough weeks are ahead” and that Ukraine needed “unity, cohesion, will and patience” during this difficult period. The UK has issued sanctions against a dozen members of Vladimir Putin’s family and inner circle including his long-rumoured girlfriend. The Foreign Office argued that the Russian president officially owns only modest assets, and has sanctioned the people who help support his lavish lifestyle. The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, spoke to his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu, for the first time since before the invasion began, the Pentagon said. Austin “urged an immediate ceasefire in Ukraine and emphasised the importance of maintaining lines of communication”, the Pentagon press secretary, John Kirby, said. The EU could agree on a phased embargo on Russian oil next week, despite concerns about supply in eastern Europe, according to diplomats and officials. A senior EU diplomat told Reuters an agreement could come as early as Monday when EU foreign ministers meet in Brussels. A third diplomat said there was a chance of an agreement later in the week. The lawyer for the US professional basketball player Brittney Griner said her pre-trial detention has been extended by one month. The two-time Olympic medallist was arrested in February at Moscow’s airport, allegedly in possession of vape cartridges containing oil derived from cannabis. If found guilty, she could face a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison. This is Helen Livingstone bringing you all the latest news on the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T04:58:15Z'}, {'id': '627dc8c18f08493b6168bc36', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the early evening, light leeches quickly from Auckland’s central business district, and the people follow. Offices regurgitate workers on to the streets, but their numbers are still thin – of the thousands sent to work from home, many have yet to return. Shopfronts on Queen Street, the main shopping artery, are pockmarked by For Lease signs. By late evening, the street is deserted. On many shop windows, owners have rolled down steel grates. Already emptied out by Covid-19, some of New Zealand’s cities are now facing a spike in crime. Police data released to RNZ indicated violent crime rates in Auckland, the largest city, were up 30% from pre-pandemic levels, and remained steady compared to the year before – despite months of lockdown keeping people indoors. In Wellington, recent shootings left some residents shaken. A series of “ram-raids”, where offenders drive cars into glass shopfronts and rob them, have dominated the headlines. The age of some alleged offenders has come as a particular shock: police report apprehending children as young as 11 behind the wheels of stolen cars.\nBy international standards, New Zealand’s cities tend to be relatively safe, and headlines in recent months sometimes contain a hint of incredulity. “Why is there gang warfare in central Wellington?” one asks. “‘What the hell is happening?’: Another ram raid in Auckland,” says another. Social service agencies and police say that behind the headlines is a simmering mixture of social deprivation, exacerbated by the stresses of the pandemic, and a cohort of New Zealanders who slipped through the cracks of government support schemes.\nDeserted and vulnerable In downtown Auckland, the Māori wardens move through the shopping district in a small flock of hi-vis vests. They pause to give a cigarette to a woman they call “auntie”. She sits near the base of the Sky Tower, Auckland city’s best-known symbol, feet bare, beanie pulled down to her eyes. “We say auntie, uncle, cousin, because they are an auntie and uncle or cousin to somebody. It’s that simple,” says Blaine Hoete, one of the wardens who looks after central Auckland. The wardens call themselves the “eyes and ears” of the city. Many have spent years giving out food and assistance, or walking on community patrols. On the streets, they say, there is growing desperation.\n“Even though the government has poured a lot of money into the Covid sector, there’s still a gap in terms of those that are hooked up,” says warden Grace Ngaroimata Le Gros of Te Tai Taukerau. Those that fall through those cracks, she says, “don’t even get looked at – so they struggle and revert to the streets, and small petty crime”.\nThey are particularly concerned for children and teenagers, who started dropping off-radar when Covid-19 closed schools. Last week, principals said one in five students was absent last term. Hoete says some have been gone much longer. “You have rangatahi [young people] that weren’t going to school for … two years. That’s a long time,” he says. “We’re talking about the children … who are street-smart, but educationally below the line. And their street smarts took over.” In recent years the makeup of the city has also shifted dramatically, as the government – short on state housing – opted to place those in urgent need into motels. “You had a lot of emergency housing spilling out on to the streets,” he says. “And they didn’t spill out on to the bright, lit up streets – they spilled into the dark dingy streets.” Those surrounding streets have also been empty. While formal lockdowns and most restrictions ended in March, repopulation of New Zealand’s inner cities has been gradual. According to pedestrian count data by the Heart of the City, Auckland’s central business association, pedestrian numbers are still well below this time last year, with some areas down 40% or more. That emptiness may be a key reason for the inner-city crime spikes, says University of Canterbury criminologist Jarrod Gilbert. He cites the theory that for most crime to occur, it needs a likely offender, a suitable target and the absence of a capable guardian – people who, simply by their presence, discourage crime from happening.\nEven if offenders and targets remain the same, in New Zealand’s cities right now, “there’s the issue of capable guardians”, he says. “Spaces that are populated by large amounts of people inhibit crime.” And emptiness can beget emptiness: if people feel unsafe, they’re less likely to come out – making environments feel increasingly deserted and vulnerable. The rise in crime itself, and the maelstrom of media coverage that accompanied it, are becoming a political issue for the government, which this month announced more than half a billion dollars in extra police funding, one of the biggest spending packages announced in the lead-up to the annual budget announcement. The $562m, to be spent on police over the next four years, will create a ratio assigning one police officer to every 480 people.\nBut the Māori wardens – alongside other social service agencies - say the robberies and ram-raids are symptoms of a set of social problems that New Zealand has struggled to make progress on: housing affordability, inequality and the rising cost of living. “If we wanted to address the situation, it [has to be] the housing situation, says Hoete. “And if we wanted to address the influence of rangatahi, and all that trauma that they’re causing … we need to remove the financial stress within the homes.” The return of people to the city’s streets will also help, says Matarora Smith. Even in recent weeks, there’s been a shift, she says, as she walks to the office’s exit. “It’s cool seeing that much people. Because for a while it was dead.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-13T05:36:15Z'}, {'id': '627fc71a8f08493b6168ccc0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow is preparing to hold a referendum in Mariupol on whether the city will join Russia, Ukrainian officials have claimed, following the announcement of a similar poll in Georgia’s breakaway region of South Ossetia. Petro Andryushchenko, an adviser to the port city’s mayor, who is operating in exile, said sources among those remaining among its ruins believed a vote on its future was in the making, even as residents were going without food and water. The ruins left of Mariupol, a sea resort once home to 400,000 people, are largely occupied by Russia, although as many as 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers are holding out in the sprawling Azovstal steelworks by the port in the face of remorseless shelling. Andryushchenko told the Observer that an announcement of a referendum could come as early as Sunday, although he said there was no evidence yet of polling stations being established. He said on Saturday: “We have some information that the Russian authorities are preparing a referendum and could even call it tomorrow, but we don’t know yet if this is the case. But we see lots of integration of Mariupol into the Russian system, the education system, the banking system.” South Ossetia leader Anatoly Bibilov had announced on Friday he would hold a referendum on joining Russia on 17 July, claiming “we are coming home” and citing his people’s “historic aspiration” to join Russia. Moscow’s initial plan to seize the whole of Ukraine failed after they lost the bloody battle of Kyiv. The Kremlin has since focused on securing a swathe of land around the east and south-east of the country. The development came as Ukrainian officials were able to claim some major military successes, with the mayor of Kharkiv saying that Russian forces had now withdrawn “far out” from Ukraine’s second biggest city. The general staff of Ukraine’s army echoed the comments, reporting the Russians had left their positions around the north-eastern city, which is 31 miles (50km) from the Russian border. The remorseless shelling endured by the civilian population in the region had also paused, according to the regional governor, Oleh Sinegubov, while Ukrainian forces were launching a counteroffensive near the city of Izyum, 78 miles south of Kharkiv.\nBut Putin’s forces have captured territory in the Donbas region, including Rubizhne, a city with a prewar population of around 55,000, and the situation appears increasingly grave for the remaining soldiers trapped in the Azovstal steelworks. Speaking on at a press conference in Kyiv, Natalia Zarytska, the wife of Bogdan Sements, who is among those trapped in the steelworks, called on China to intervene and help liberate the remaining people. She said: “Strong leaders cannot stand aside when there is evil. After all these negotiations, there is one person worldwide who it would be difficult for Vladimir Putin to refuse. We hope that strong and good China can make difficult decisions for the good. “We ask the esteemed premier of China, Xi Jinping, to express love and care for global values and eastern wisdom and to join the process of rescuing the defenders of Mariupol.” Hanna Ivleieva, a military service person and wife of a soldier in Mariupol, said only those who had lost their arms or legs were not fighting among the Ukrainian forces left in the city. She said: “I am a soldier with the Marines. My husband, my commanding officers, and close friends are now in Azovstal. “They were the first to engage in the battle in this war. We are proud of all Azovstal defenders, as they are stronger than the steel used to be produced here. “But we do not want them to be killed there. We need our heroes alive. We ask the President of China as Putin’s economic partner to undertake all the necessary procedures and rescue our guys”. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said talks with Moscow on extracting a “large number” of wounded defenders and some medics out of the steelworks in return for the release of Russian prisoners of war were “very complex”, adding that Kyiv was using influential intermediaries. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, told local TV on Saturday that efforts were now focused on evacuating about 60 people. Ibrahim Kalin, a senior foreign policy adviser to Turkey’s president Recep Erdoğan, said on Saturday that the Turkish government had proposed to Moscow a sea evacuation of the wounded soldiers. As the war grinds on, foreign ministers from the world’s seven richest countries, the G7, warned at the end of a three-day meeting in Germany that millions of people will starve to death unless Russia allows the export of Ukrainian grain from blockaded ports. The G7 governments said Putin was pushing 43 million people towards famine by refusing to allow cereals to leave Ukraine via Black Sea ports. “Russia’s unprovoked and pre-meditated war of aggression has exacerbated the global economic outlook with sharply rising food, fuel and energy prices,” they said in a joint statement. “Combined with Russia blocking the exit routes for Ukraine’s grain, the world is now facing a worsening state of food insecurity and malnutrition ... This is at a time when 43 million people were already one-step away from famine.”Canada’s foreign minister, Mélanie Joly, told reporters: “We need to make sure that these cereals are sent to the world. If not, millions of people will be facing famine.”\nThe G7 countries said they would expand sanctions on Russia and that they would not accept the new borders Russia is seeking to draw. They said: “We will never recognise borders Russia has attempted to change by military aggression, and will uphold our engagement in the support of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including Crimea, and all states. “We reaffirm our determination to further increase economic and political pressure on Russia, continuing to act in unity.” They called on China not to aid Putin and “to desist from engaging in information manipulation, disinformation and other means to legitimise Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine”. Three weeks before Putin launched his war in Ukraine, the Russian president signed a pact with his Chinese counterpart that said there would be “no limits” to the two countries’ cooperation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-14T17:42:39Z'}]}