{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A true man of peace’: what the papers say about the death of Mikhail Gorbachev', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-31T03:11:15Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/31/a-true-man-of-peace-what-the-papers-say-about-the-death-of-mikhail-gorbachev', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Mikhail Gorbachev', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mikhail-gorbachev'}, {'tagTitle': 'Newspapers', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Media', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/media/media'}, {'tagTitle': 'Newspapers & magazines', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/media/pressandpublishing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Farrer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinfarrer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 8, 'elements': [{'id': '630ea3998f087b6858318609', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The familar face of Mikhail Gorbachev looks out from the front pages as many of Wednesday’s papers marked his death by heaping praise on the man who helped bring about the end of the cold war. The Guardian has a large picture of the former Soviet leader and the headline “Mikhail Gorbachev 1931-2022: Soviet leader who ended the cold war dies aged 91”. The front page report says Gorbachev would always be associated with his attempts to reform the old USSR “a process that he ultimately lost control of, leading to the country’s collapse”.\nThe Times has very similar treatment with a large photograph of Gorbachev in his heyday and a report head “Gorbachev, USSR’s last leader, dies at 91”. It notes that he won the Nobel peace prize in 1990 for his efforts to end the arms race with the United States, but was “widely hated” by Russians who resented their loss of superpower status and a collapse in living standards.\nThe Telegraph says “Gorbachev dies at 91” and its page one report says he was a “charming and modernising” figure hailed in the west while his reforms ended “sparking a sharp economic decline that set off nationalism in across the region and allowed the oligarchs” to gain control of state-owned assets.\nThe Metro is the only UK paper to lead on the news in the early editions and has the headline “World mourns a true man of peace”.\nThe German paper Frankfurter Allgemeine has the front page headline “Michail Gorbatschow gestorben” (“Mikhail Gorbachev has died”) and describes him in glowing terms for his role in the fall of the Berlin Wall paving the way for German reunification. “The world-renowned politician was considered one of the fathers of German unity and a pioneer for the end of the Cold War,” it reports. “East Germans in particular still revere ‘Gorbi’, as they call him, as a statesman who brought them freedom more than three decades ago.”\nIn Spain, El Mundo has the story on its front page with the headline “Gorbachov, el líder que abrió Rusia al mundo” (“Gorbachov, the leader who opened Russia to the world, dies”.\nThe Sun makes room for a small story on its front page and describes the late Soviet president as “peacemaker” who helped end the cold war. “Gorby dies at 91”, says the headline.\nThe Express also has a small spot on the front with the headline “Gorbachev, who end the Cold War, dies”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T02:51:02Z'}, {'id': '630ec56d8f08fb7d69ffe4fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We will shortly be closing this live blog. In the meantime, here is a quick recap of the past few hours. Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, the former Soviet leader who ended the cold war, died in Moscow aged 91. “Mikhail Gorbachev passed away tonight after a serious and protracted disease,” Interfax news agency cited Russia’s Central Clinical Hospital as saying in a statement. He will be buried in Moscow’s Novodevichy Cemetery next to his wife Raisa, who died in 1999, said Tass news agency, citing a source familiar with the family’s wishes. The Russian president Vladimir Putin expresses his deepest condolences, a Kremlin spokesman told the Interfax news agency. Gorbachev’s political legacy was destroyed by Putin as the era of detente and arms control between Washington and Moscow is replaced by a bloody war in Ukraine, Julian Borger writes. The former Soviet leader was celebrated across liberal democracies but reviled and unpopular in Russia, Pjotr Sauer writes. His policy of ‘glasnost’, or openness, gave Russians previously unthinkable levels of freedom, but for many, his rule will be remembered by the dramatic plunge in living standards that followed. Gorbachev, a champion of arms control, opposed Putin’s war in Ukraine. He issued a statement through his foundation in the days after Russia’s invasion calling for “an early cessation of hostilities and immediate start of peace negotiations”. “There is nothing more precious in the world than human lives,” he added. A flood of tributes from across the world poured in for the man described as “one of the greatest figures of the 20th century” and universally credited with ending the cold war. US President Joe Biden described Gorbachev as a man of “remarkable vision” who led his country on the path to reform. “These were the acts of a rare leader – one with the imagination to see that a different future was possible and the courage to risk his entire career to achieve it,” Biden said in a statement. “The result was a safer world and greater freedom for millions of people.” António Guterres, general secretary of the United Nations, said Gorbachev was a “one-of-a kind statesman who changed the course of history”. “The world has lost a towering global leader, committed multilateralist, and tireless advocate for peace. I’m deeply saddened by his passing,” he tweeted. French President Emmanuel Macron described Gorbachev as “a man of peace whose choices opened a path to freedom for Russians”. “His commitment to peace in Europe changed our common history,” he added. Boris Johnson, the outgoing British prime minister, said he “always admired the courage and integrity he showed in bringing the cold war to a peaceful conclusion”. Gorbachev was the most important world figure of the last quarter of the 20th century. Almost singlehandedly he brought an end to 40 years of east-west confrontation in Europe and liberated the world from the danger of nuclear conflagration. Read his full obituary here. In a 2011 interview with the Guardian, Gorbachev said he should have resigned in April 1991 and formed a democratic party of reform, adding he regretted “the fact that I went on too long in trying to reform the Communist party”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T02:52:41Z'}, {'id': '630eca5c8f087b68583186ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has said former Russian leader Mikhail Gorbachev “changed the world for the better”, in a tribute message posted on Wednesday afternoon following the death of the last leader of the Soviet Union. He freed the nations of Eastern Europe from the prison of Soviet rule, and helped bring an end to the Cold War,” Albanese wrote in a message posted to Facebook, calling Gorbachev “a man of warmth, hope, resolve and enormous courage”. With his death we have lost one of the true giants of the 20th century.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T02:42:34Z'}, {'id': '630ec4728f087b685831869a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev was the most important world figure of the last quarter of the 20th century. Almost singlehandedly he brought an end to 40 years of east-west confrontation in Europe and liberated the world from the danger of nuclear conflagration. It was not the objective he set himself when he was elected general secretary of the Soviet Communist party in March 1985, nor did he predict or plan the way the cold war would end, the haemorrhaging of the Communist party, the withdrawal of Soviet troops from eastern Europe, the reunification of Germany or the break-up of the Soviet Union itself. Like other great reformers in history, he ended up in isolation, condemned by some for doing too much and by others for doing too little. For the world beyond Russia, his great service lay in allowing the cold war to come to an end. It did not end as he had hoped – in a grand reconciliation between east and west. Indeed, in retirement he criticised western leaders for expanding Nato to take in several of the former Soviet republics, which he thought was unnecessary and provocative. Inside Russia, his economic reforms failed, though not as catastrophically as those that followed under Yeltsin. Yeltsin’s circle blamed Gorbachev for the miserable legacy they inherited. Gorbachev, for his part, blamed the legacy of Stalinism for the situation he took over. He will be remembered as the man who consigned the one-party system to oblivion and gave Russians room to breathe. Yeltsin’s successor Vladimir Putin treated Gorbachev with respect despite Gorbachev’s occasional criticisms of the slide back towards authoritarianism. Read the full obituary below.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T02:18:47Z'}, {'id': '630eb9c38f08fb7d69ffe4bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev – a life in pictures.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T01:52:25Z'}, {'id': '630eb7b08f08fb7d69ffe4b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev has been described as “one of the greatest figures of the 20th century” in a flood of tributes from across the world to the man universally credited with ending the cold war. There was gushing praise for the former Soviet president from past and present western leaders, political commentators, academics, historians and celebrities after his death in Russia on Tuesday night aged 91. Read a more comprehensive rundown of the tributes that have poured in for the “one-of-a kind” Soviet leader in our story below.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T01:29:13Z'}, {'id': '630eb6a68f087b6858318657', 'bodyTextSummary': 'European leaders have also paid tribute to Mikhail Gorbachev today. French President Emmanuel Macron described Gorbachev as “a man of peace whose choices opened a path to freedom for Russians”. “His commitment to peace in Europe changed our common history,” he added.\nAustrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer said the former Soviet leader “shaped the rapprochement between east and west after the fall of the Iron Curtain in Europe”. Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte lamented the loss of a “a courageous reformer with immense influence on history”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T01:19:39Z'}, {'id': '630eb25c8f08fa7e6340c91f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gorbachev won massive support among ordinary people in the west and hoped to fundamentally change the mindset of Russia, a country that had never experienced democracy, having gone straight from Romanov to Bolshevik dictatorships.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T01:08:28Z'}, {'id': '630eae4f8f08fb7d69ffe488', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the wake of Gorbachev’s death, many are remembering the former Soviet leaders infamous 1997 Pizza Hut commercial. In the advertisement, a fight over Gorbachev’s legacy ensues between a group of customers. “Because of him, we have economic confusion!” one man says. “Because of him, we have opportunity!” another adds. “Because of him, we have many things … like Pizza Hut!” a woman concludes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T00:55:11Z'}, {'id': '630eaba18f087b6858318623', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Despite being celebrated across liberal democracies, the former Soviet leader was reviled and unpopular in Russia, Pjotr Sauer writes for us today. Until his very last day, Mikhail Gorbachev lived in a dual reality – loved and celebrated in Washington, Paris and London, but reviled by large numbers of Russians who never forgave him for the turbulence that his reforms unleashed.\nHis policy of ‘glasnost’, or openness, gave Russians previously unthinkable levels of freedom, but for many, his rule will be remembered by the dramatic plunge in living standards that followed. Others, haunted by Soviet nostalgia, saw Gorbachev as the destroyer of their empire and blame his policies for emboldening nationalists who successfully pushed for independence in the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and elsewhere across the former Soviet bloc. Read the full story below.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T00:35:51Z'}, {'id': '630ea7ef8f08fa7e6340c8f0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gorbachev issued a warning against Putin’s leadership in 2011 for what was to come. It’s perhaps understandable that during the initial phase he used certain authoritarian methods in his leadership, but using authoritarian methods as a policy for the future – that I think is wrong. I think that’s a mistake,” he said at a public event in the US. Gorbachev later spoke to the BBC in 2013 about how his relationship with Putin had “soured” since the former KGB agent took office in 2000. “He sometimes loses his temper,” he said, referring to a comment where Putin had warned that Gorbachev should watch his tongue when making public criticism of his regime. I get the feeling he’s very tense and worried … Not everything is going well. I think he should change his style and make changes to his regime.” Condemning newly enacted laws cracking down on government criticism, Gorbachev said: “For goodness sake, you should not be afraid of your own people.” He also criticised Putin’s inner circle, saying it was full of “thieves and corrupt officials”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T00:30:17Z'}, {'id': '630ea5128f08fb7d69ffe463', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A journalist who had remained close to Gorbachev said in July that the former Soviet leader was “upset” by what he saw in Ukraine. “Gorbachev’s reforms – political, not economic – were all destroyed,” the journalist Alexei Venediktov, the editor of the Ekho Moskvy radio station, told the Russian Forbes magazine. “Nilch, zero, ashes.” Gorbachev former interpreter, Pavel Palazhchenko, who works for the Gorbachev Centre thinktank, told Fox News two days before the invasion: He always warned things could happen that could be very dangerous between Russia and Ukraine, but he always did what he could in order to bring those two nations closer together rather than see a continuation of this rift that we now see widening. So for him, emotionally, it is very tragic.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T00:14:29Z'}, {'id': '630ea28f8f087b6858318603', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gorbachev, a champion of arms control, issued a statement through his foundation in the days after Russia’s invasion calling for “an early cessation of hostilities and immediate start of peace negotiations”. In connection with Russia’s military operation in Ukraine, begun on February 24, we affirm the need for an early cessation of hostilities and immediate start of peace negotiations. There is nothing more precious in the world than human lives. Negotiations and dialogue on the basis of mutual respect and recognition of interests are the only possible way to resolve the most acute contradictions and problems. We support any efforts aimed at the resumption of negotiating process.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T00:11:59Z'}, {'id': '630ea0998f087b68583185fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev lived long enough to see everything he had tried to achieve crumble or get blown up, Julian Borger writes for us today. The era of detente and arms control between Washington and Moscow has been replaced by a bloody war in Ukraine in which US and Nato weaponry is being pitted against Russian forces with the accompanying risk of a direct clash between the nuclear superpowers by accident or miscalculation. By the time Gorbachev stepped down at the end of 1991, the Nato-Soviet frontier was no longer a flashpoint. Nato pulled all but a few thousand troops back from the eastern flank, and the terrors of the cold war seemed consigned to history books and museums. In the wake of the Ukraine invasion in February, Nato has rushed troops eastwards, mobilising 40,000 troops under its direct command, with plans to put 300,000 on high alert. Gorbachev was a champion of arms control and even discussed the potential elimination of nuclear weapons with Ronald Reagan at the Reykjavik summit in 1986. Now, the last remaining agreement between US and Russia limiting nuclear weapons is being corroded by Russia’s suspension of mutual inspections. Both countries are modernising their arsenals and Putin has made a point of threatening nuclear use. Read the full story below.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T23:49:59Z'}, {'id': '630e9c528f08fa7e6340c8c6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet leader, was one of the most talked about people in the world. Here are some memorable quotes about him. British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, BBC interview, December 14, 1984: I like Mr Gorbachev. We can do business together.” Article from the Washington Post, November 1987: Just now, thanks to charming Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, his nicely dressed wife Raisa, and his glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring), it is the flavour of the month. Hip boutiques are selling Lenin pins and hammer-and-sickle T-shirts. We’re giving Gorbachev approval ratings higher than those for all the Democratic candidates except Jesse Jackson. The Washington Blade, a gay newspaper, ran an ad for a Mrs Gorbachev look-alike contest... What’s going on here? Only yesterday the Soviet Union was everything grim, gray, brutal and bureaucratic.... Now, even with the thick roster of protests planned around Gorbachev’s visit, the atmosphere is changing in one of those great lurches of national feeling that foreigners find both charming and frightening about America.” US President Ronald Reagan, speech at Berlin Wall, June 12, 1987: There is one sign the Soviets can make that would be unmistakable, that would advance dramatically the cause of freedom and peace. General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalisation: Come here to this gate! Mr Gorbachev, open this gate! Mr Gorbachev, tear down this wall!” US President George Bush, at press conference alongside Gorbachev after talks, 3 December, 1989: For forty years, the Western alliance has stood together in the cause of freedom. And now, with reform under way in the Soviet Union, we stand at the threshold of a brand new era of US-Soviet relations... I am optimistic that as the west works patiently together and increasingly cooperates with the Soviet Union, we can realise a lasting peace and transform the east-west relationship to one of enduring cooperation.” Russian President Vladimir Putin, congratulating Gorbachev on his 91st birthday, 2 March, 2022, as quoted by Tass: You have lived a long, fulfilling life, and you’ve rightfully earned great prestige and recognition. It is gratifying that today your multifaceted work contributes to the implementation of much-needed social, educational, charitable projects, as well as to the development of international humanitarian cooperation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T23:30:00Z'}, {'id': '630e97628f08fb7d69ffe419', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Reagan Foundation and Institute said it “mourns the loss of former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, a man who once was a political adversary of Ronald Reagan’s who ended up becoming a friend. Our thoughts and prayers go out to the Gorbachev family and the people of Russia”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T23:06:07Z'}, {'id': '630e95358f08fb7d69ffe40c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian’s former Moscow correspondent recalled in 2011 about how he learnt of the coup against Gorbachev in 1991.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:56:10Z'}, {'id': '630e92118f08fb7d69ffe3ff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mark Stone, from Sky News, has tweeted this poignant image of Gorbachev with Ronald Reagan.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:45:17Z'}, {'id': '630e91f58f08fb7d69ffe3fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jonathan Eyal, of the think-tank the Royal United Services Institute, said: He [Gorbachev] didn’t believe that the Soviet Union was actually an empire in itself of nations that did not want to be shackled. Like all Soviet leaders, and dare I say like Russian leaders today, he saw the Soviet Union as synonymous with Russia and he simply could not understand why nations wanted to be independent.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:43:13Z'}, {'id': '630e8f868f087b68583185a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former US secretary of state Henry Kissinger said Gorbachev “performed great services” but was “not able to implement all of his visions”. He told BBC’s Newsnight: The people of eastern Europe and the German people, and in the end the Russian people, owe him a great debt of gratitude for the inspiration, for the courage in coming forward with these ideas of freedom. Kissinger, after again acknowledging Gorbachev was unable to implement his full vision, added: He will still be remembered in history as a man who started historic transformations that were to the benefit of mankind and to the Russian people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:33:37Z'}, {'id': '630e8dde8f08fb7d69ffe3eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'António Guterres, secretary general of the United Nations, has described Gorbachev as a “towering leader”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:31:52Z'}, {'id': '630e8c8c8f087b685831859a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sir Keir Starmer, leader of the Labour party in England, said Mikhail Gorbachev was “one of the great figures” of last century who will “forever be remembered”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:56:57Z'}, {'id': '630e8b8a8f087b685831858d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Peter Baker, from the New York Times, has shared this tribute.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:13:43Z'}, {'id': '630e8b328f08fa7e6340c858', 'bodyTextSummary': 'His first public remarks on the Chernobyl nuclear power station disaster, delivered on Russian television on 14 May 1986, 18 days after the explosion. This is one more tolling of the bell, and a new terrible warning, that in the nuclear age what is needed is new political thinking and new policies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:13:20Z'}, {'id': '630e8a0c8f08fb7d69ffe3cd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some notable quotes from Mikhail Gorbachev. On meeting his wife Raisa (from an interview with US Vogue in 2013): One day we took each other by the hand and went for a walk in the evening. And we walked like that for our whole life.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:21:00Z'}, {'id': '630e88088f08fb7d69ffe3be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Arnold Schwarzenegger, the actor and former governor of California, has tweeted this tribute and photograph of himself with Gorbachev.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:58:49Z'}, {'id': '630e865a8f08fa7e6340c84a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a 2011 interview with the Guardian, Gorbachev was asked to name the things he most regretted. He replied: The fact that I went on too long in trying to reform the Communist party. He should have resigned in April 1991, he said, and formed a democratic party of reform since the Communists were putting the brakes on all the necessary changes. His second regret, he said, is that he did not start to reform the Soviet Union and give more power to its 15 republics at an earlier stage.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:01:56Z'}, {'id': '630e85968f08fa7e6340c848', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Condoleezza Rice, former US secretary of state, has posted a tribute on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:21:58Z'}, {'id': '630e84fb8f08fa7e6340c844', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gorbachev was remembered fondly in the west, where he was referred to affectionately by the nickname Gorby and best known for defusing US-Soviet nuclear tensions in the 1980s as well as bringing eastern Europe out from behind the Iron Curtain. He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1990 for negotiating a historic nuclear arms pact with the US president Ronald Reagan, and his decision to withhold the Soviet army when the Berlin Wall fell a year earlier was seen as key to preserving Cold War peace, AFP reports. He was also championed in the west for spearheading reforms to achieve transparency and greater public discussion that hastened the breakup of the Soviet empire.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:51:25Z'}, {'id': '630e840c8f08fb7d69ffe3ab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s outgoing prime minister, Boris Johnson, said he is “saddened” to hear that Mikhail Gorbachev has died, in a “time of Putin’s aggression in Ukraine”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:21:05Z'}, {'id': '630e84048f087b685831856b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Putin’s press secretary Dmitry Peskov said in the morning the Russian president would send a telegram with condolences to the relatives and friends of the statesman.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:51:56Z'}, {'id': '630e82da8f08fb7d69ffe3a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, has paid tribute on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:20:36Z'}, {'id': '630e82a58f08fb7d69ffe3a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Broadcaster and author John Simpson said he is “really sad” that the “decent” and “well-intentioned” former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev has died. In a Twitter post, Simpson, who interviewed Gorbachev, wrote: “Really sad that Mikhail Gorbachev has died: a decent, well-intentioned, principled man who tried to rescue the unrescuable.” He added: “In private he was charming and surprisingly amusing. It wasn’t his fault things went so wrong.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:35:53Z'}, {'id': '630e81ba8f087b6858318559', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian president Vladimir Putin expresses his deepest condolences on the death of Mikhail Gorbachev, a Kremlin spokesman told the Interfax news agency.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:19:58Z'}, {'id': '630e80e68f08fb7d69ffe396', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former farm worker with the rolling south Russian accent and distinctive port-wine birthmark on his head gave notice of his bold ambition soon after winning a Kremlin power struggle in 1985, at the age of 54, Reuters reports. Television broadcasts showed him besieged by workers in factories and farms, allowing them to vent their frustrations with Soviet life and making the case for radical change. It marked a dramatic break with the cabal of old men he succeeded – remote, intolerant of dissent, their chests groaning with medals, dogmatic to the grave. Three ailing Soviet leaders had died in the previous 2-1/2 years. Gorbachev inherited a land of inefficient farms and decaying factories, a state-run economy he believed could be saved only by the open, honest criticism that had led so often in the past to prison or labour camp. It was a gamble. Many wished him ill. With his clever, elegant wife Raisa at his side, Gorbachev at first enjoyed massive popular support. “My policy was open and sincere, a policy aimed at using democracy and not spilling blood,” he told Reuters in 2009. “But this cost me very dear, I can tell you that.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:34:02Z'}, {'id': '630e7fc58f08fb7d69ffe390', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The front page of Wednesday’s Guardian.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:23:38Z'}, {'id': '630e7dac8f08fa7e6340c816', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Mikhail Gorbachev passed away tonight after a serious and protracted disease,” Interfax news agency cited Russia’s Central Clinical Hospital as saying in a statement. Gorbachev will be buried in Moscow’s Novodevichy Cemetery next to his wife Raisa, who died in 1999, said Tass news agency, citing a source familiar with the family’s wishes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:19:19Z'}, {'id': '630e7ce88f08fb7d69ffe380', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Micheál Martin, the taoiseach of Ireland, has paid tribute.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T22:22:53Z'}, {'id': '630e7c218f087b685831853d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gorbachev spent much of the last two decades on the political periphery, intermittently calling for the Kremlin and the White House to mend ties as tensions soared to Cold War levels since Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 and launched an offensive in Ukraine earlier this year, AFP reports. He spent the twilight years of his life in and out of hospital with increasingly fragile health and observed self-quarantine during the pandemic as a precaution against coronavirus.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:07:47Z'}, {'id': '630e7a7d8f087b6858318530', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Mikhail Sergeevich Gorbachev died this evening after a serious and long illness,” the Central Clinical Hospital in Moscow said, quoted by the Interfax, TASS and RIA Novosti news agencies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:01:21Z'}, {'id': '630e791e8f087b685831851f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former leader of the Lib Dems, Tim Farron, has posted a tribute on Twitter:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:53:26Z'}, {'id': '630e78178f087b6858318517', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tom Tugendhat, chair of the foreign affairs committee in the UK, has tweeted:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:22:33Z'}, {'id': '630e76d68f087b6858318502', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When pro-democracy protests swept across the Soviet bloc nations of communist Eastern Europe in 1989, Gorbachev refrained from using force unlike previous Kremlin leaders who had sent tanks to crush uprisings in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968, Reuters reports. But the protests fuelled aspirations for autonomy in the 15 republics of the Soviet Union, which disintegrated over the next two years in chaotic fashion. On becoming general secretary of the Soviet Communist Party in 1985, aged just 54, he had set out to revitalise the system by introducing limited political and economic freedoms, but his reforms spun out of control. His policy of “glasnost” - free speech - allowed previously unthinkable criticism of the party and the state, but also emboldened nationalists who began to press for independence in the Baltic republics of Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and elsewhere. After visiting Gorbachev in hospital in June, liberal economist Ruslan Grinberg told the armed forces news outlet Zvezda: “He gave us all freedom - but we don’t know what to do with it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T20:45:51Z'}, {'id': '630e758e8f08fa7e6340c7b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Soviet leader who ended the cold war, has died aged 91. The last president before the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 forged arms reduction deals with the United States and partnerships with Western powers to remove the Iron Curtain that had divided Europe since World War Two and bring about the reunification of Germany.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:20:51Z'}, {'id': '630d84018f08237696476ae4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tan Eng Hong’s voice wavers as he remembers his 12-year struggle against Section 377A, a law that criminalises sex between men in Singapore. When he heard the announcement this month that the law would finally be repealed, he felt relief. “I thought I would die before I could hear this,” he says. He thanks god, and the universe, that he is alive to witness such a landmark moment. It was in 2010 that Tan Eng Hong experienced one of the most difficult episodes in his life. He was arrested by police for having oral sex with a consenting adult man in a locked toilet cubicle at a mall in downtown Singapore after staff at a nearby restaurant reportedly called police. Tan, then 47, was handcuffed, his bags were searched and he taken into custody. “My whole body went paralysed. I was wondering how I was going to carry on,” he says. Tan, and the man he was with, were charged under Section 377A, a law introduced under British colonial rule. For Tan, who also goes by the name Ivan, his arrest was deeply traumatic. But that moment would prove hugely consequential in the battle for gay rights in Singapore. Backed by the prominent human rights lawyer M Ravi, Tan went on to file a lawsuit challenging Section 377A, arguing that it violated his right to liberty, equal protection, and freedom of association. It was the first time that the law had been challenged in the courts as unconstitutional and, though, unsuccessful at the time, has been recognised as a milestone in the struggle against Section 377A. Fighting the stigma After his arrest, Tan confided in M Ravi, a trusted friend. “That day when he came to my office, he was kneeling down… he was so full of guilt,” says Ravi. He was struck by the injustice of Tan’s case. If heterosexuals are caught having sex in public places they would typically face a fine, yet Tan had to contend with such disproportionate stigma. Attitudes towards gay rights in Singapore were shifting at the time. The 1990s had been marked by raids of gay establishments, and the growth of so-called “conversion therapy”, a discriminatory and harmful practice, which Tan himself underwent. His background in Christianity that was not tolerant of gay relationships made his arrest especially difficult. “You can imagine how traumatic those moments were in my life,” Tan says. In the 2000s tolerance increased in some areas of Singapore, as did activism. Theatres, for example, showed plays that depicted gay characters, a campaign to repeal Section 377A was launched in 2007, and by 2009, the non-profit movement Pink Dot began its inaugural gathering in support of the LGBT community, with thousands turning out dressed in pink. Tan’s case, however, faced opposition on various fronts. On top of intense lobbying by the religious conservatives, many in the gay community were also critical of his decision to file a lawsuit, says Ravi. Ravi, who has taken on many sensitive human rights cases, found that Ivan’s lawsuit was the least likely to generate sympathy. “Death penalty challenge is a noble cause … fighting even for a murderer to have his life restored is a noble cause,” he says. But the circumstances of Tan’s arrest were off putting to many. Tan was not the only Section 377A case at that time, Ravi adds. He had also been approached by a young man who said he had become suicidal because he was being investigated under the same law - despite the government stating in 2007 that it would not be actively enforced. It was perhaps the exposure associated with being in court that Tan feared most. “The news will have your name all over, you feel the pressure and how they view you,” he says. Court cases are places for legal arguments and jargon. “You don’t have the opportunity to tell your story correctly,” he adds. Less than one month after Tan filed his lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of 377A, he was informed that his charge had been amended to one of public obscenity under Section 294(a) of the Penal Code. He pled guilty, but continued to pursue his challenge to Section 377A, which went to both the High Court and the Court of Appeal. The case eventually led to a ruling by the Court of Appeal that a person has legal standing to challenge legislation for being in violation of their constitutional rights. The verdict “opened the doors to all the subsequent challenges,” says Dr Roy Tan, a healthcare professional who, represented by Ravi, was one of three LGBT activists to launch another case against 377A in 2019. Though their challenge was dismissed, the court described the law as “unenforceable”. ‘It affects the whole community’ For Tan, the effects of Section 377A filter down to all aspects of life, from discrimination in housing to affecting what kinds of relationships can be shown on free-to-air TV or what kinds of lessons can be taught in schools. “It doesn’t only affect me, it affects the whole community,” he adds. After the repealing of the law “more people will accept and learn to accept LGBTQ people as they are.” However, when prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong announced Section 377a would be repealed, he also said the government had no intention of allowing equal marriage. He would change the constitution to prevent future legal challenges to the existing definition of marriage, he said. Tan who has waited 12 years for Section 377a to be repealed is well aware that change takes time. But he also hopes that awareness and tolerance is growing among Singapore’s younger generation. Tan refers to the stall in which he was arrested as the Stonewall toilet, because of its significance in his fight for justice. Has the pain of what happened 12 years ago healed? Tan says his experience has taught him compassion. “After all that journey, maybe it was worth it, even if there was pain, it is ok. That’s ok.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T23:53:38Z'}, {'id': '73cacd7b-0afe-46d6-bf35-cffeb154960d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev, who has died aged 91, was the most important world figure of the last quarter of the 20th century. Almost singlehandedly he brought an end to 40 years of east-west confrontation in Europe and liberated the world from the danger of nuclear conflagration. It was not the objective he set himself when he was elected general secretary of the Soviet Communist party in March 1985, nor did he predict or plan the way the cold war would end, the haemorrhaging of the Communist party, the withdrawal of Soviet troops from eastern Europe, the reunification of Germany or the break-up of the Soviet Union itself. What distinguished Gorbachev from previous Soviet leaders was that he started a process of reform and did not try to reverse it once it threatened to spin out of control. The great facilitator, he carried on, even to the point of resigning with dignity as his power faded away. In the aftermath of his downfall, as his successor Boris Yeltsin stumbled into market economics, it became fashionable in the west to sneer at Gorbachev as “just another communist at heart”. He was called a failure because he had not been willing to liberalise state-controlled prices, privatise industry and open the Soviet economy to outside forces as fast as the emerging Russian elite or Yeltsin’s rightwing western advisers wanted. He was ridiculed for trying to “reform” communism when he should have recognised that it was dead.\nThe charges were unfair – as well as inaccurate – since they characterised Gorbachev as an ideologue when he was, in fact, one of the great pragmatists of modern Russian history. The only part that was true was that he tried to “reform” life for Russians. He sought to maintain some form of democratic socialism, with a continuing role for government intervention and a foundation of social justice. Compared with the crony capitalism and chaotic collapse of public services that marked the first years of post-communism in Russia, his goals seem admirable. There were a variety of avenues for developing democracy and introducing a market economy, and his view that the process should be done gradually was legitimate and honourable. Gorbachev was not alone in failing to predict the demise of the communist system. None of his contemporaries saw the situation any more clearly than he did, nor did western politicians or analysts. As late as 1988 – only three years before the end – Yeltsin was pleading with the Communist party to “rehabilitate” him and give him another chance after he had resigned from the politburo. Rightwing western politicians, among them Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, later claimed that they had brought about the collapse by “standing up to totalitarianism”. But the record suggests that the system self-destructed. Communism, in practice, was never a monolith. It was constantly evolving. During the 1930s, Joseph Stalin knocked away the last props of consent and used terror as the central pillar of regime stability. But in the years of Leonid Brezhnev’s rule, from 1964 to 1982, terror vanished. The system’s stability still rested partly on repression, but also on its ability to provide a secure material environment for the overwhelming majority and a slowly improving standard of living. Much of it was paid for by the export of plentiful oil and gas reserves, but it could have continued under Gorbachev for another 10 or 20 years. There was no overriding urgency for the process of perestroika (“restructuring” or “transformation”) that he set in train. The system was not as efficient as it should have been, and Soviet citizens were not as happy as the propaganda alleged. But nor were they on the verge of revolt. Five years after the Soviet collapse, 40% of Russian voters were still willing to support the Communist party candidate in the 1996 presidential election.\nThe story of Gorbachev, in fact, is a fine example of the occasional importance of the personal factor in human history. As general secretary, he was one of the world’s most powerful men. He could have remained in office for years had he not chosen the path of reform. The son of Maria (nee Gopkalo) and Sergey Gorbachev, he was born in the village of Privolnoye, in the Stavropol region of southern Russia. His paternal grandfather was chairman of the area’s first collective farm and an early party member; his father was a tractor driver. Misha, as Mikhail was known, was educated locally and helped out in the summer with the harvest. A bright and ambitious boy, on leaving school he applied to enter the law faculty of the prestigious Moscow State University. The five years he spent there from 1950 marked him out as something of an intellectual, although a contemporary with whom he shared rooms, the Czech Zdenek Mlynar, remembered that a favourite Gorbachev phrase came from Hegel: “Truth is always concrete.” He used the expression to highlight the gap between what lecturers said about Soviet life and the reality on the ground. Stalin’s death occurred on 5 March 1953, halfway through Gorbachev’s time at university. Although both his grandfathers had been arrested in the 1930s – one of them was sent to a Siberian labour camp for “sabotaging” socialism – Gorbachev reacted to the event like most of his contemporaries; deeply moved, he spent all night queuing to see the dictator’s body lying in state. The thaw that followed made his lecturers more open and interesting, he wrote in his autobiography, but it was not enough to turn him off an orthodox career pattern.\nHe had been active in the Komsomol, the Young Communist League, while at university, and on graduation in 1955 he went back to Stavropol to work in the local agitation and propaganda department. He moved into the party proper, and made a rapid rise through its ranks. Within 15 years he was first secretary of the Stavropol regional party organisation. In the top-down, hierarchical structure it was a post akin to governor-general. Orders were received from above and handed on below, without any serious or open discussion of other options. The job gave the holder an almost automatic seat on the party’s central committee, in theory the main policy-making organ. At 40, Gorbachev was one of its youngest members. Stavropol was a relatively rich and agriculturally efficient area, and Gorbachev, as the top regional man, got to know his predecessors, Mikhail Suslov and Yuri Andropov, by then close to the pinnacle of the Soviet system. He also knew Fyodor Kulakov, the man in charge of Soviet agriculture, who seemed destined for the top job, general secretary of the central committee. But Kulakov died suddenly in 1978, and Gorbachev was given the agriculture portfolio, a job that also gave him candidate membership in the central committee’s inner cabinet, the politburo. He was now close to the seat of power himself, and the youngest member of an increasingly ageing team of men. He saw the semi-senile Brezhnev, consumed by vanity and refusing to retire, take the fateful decision with the veteran foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and the defence minister Dmitri Ustinov to invade Afghanistan in 1979 without consulting the politburo. Whatever he thought, Gorbachev was too good an official to oppose the decision. The man he admired was Andropov, who succeeded Brezhnev in 1982 and tried to accelerate economic growth by raising the rate of investment and giving enterprises limited permission to retain some of their profits. Andropov also hoped to channel investment away from the military-industrial complex by putting a cap on the arms race. But his health collapsed and he died in 1984, after only 14 months in office. Gorbachev should have been the obvious successor, but the politburo chose another ailing figure, Konstantin Chernenko. The old guard thought Gorbachev was still too young. When Chernenko died a year later, Gorbachev’s turn as general secretary was almost inevitable.\nHis colleagues had no idea that he would set off a chain of dramatic reforms. But nor did he. He did not come to power with a plan. He had told some contemporaries, such as Eduard Shevardnadze, whom he was to appoint as foreign minister, that “things” could not continue as they were. What he was referring to was the economy, where defence spending was growing faster than any other sector. At first, he continued on the Andropov path of controlled reform, or uskorenye (acceleration). But there were two differences. Gorbachev was aware that a swath of younger people in the middle ranks of the party’s central apparatus in Moscow – as well as in the academic institutes – thought like him. He could rely on their support. He decided to become more open about the problems of Soviet society, travelling the country, admitting to difficulties and listening to ordinary people complain. Uskorenye changed to perestroika. The hope was that Soviet people, in return for the leadership’s new honesty, would join a new social contract and work harder and more efficiently. The Gorbachev ideologues described it as the “human factor”, an echo of the 1968 Prague Spring, when Czech and Slovak reformers tried to introduce “socialism with a human face”. He also sought to win greater consent by allowing writers and journalists to reopen many taboo issues. The blanks in official Soviet history — such as the Stalinist purges and the full horror of the Gulag — could be filled in. Contemporary problems, such as drunkenness, prostitution, homelessness, crime and corruption, could be aired in the press. Known as glasnost, this policy meant the end of censorship. Unlike Andropov, Gorbachev also resolved to take unilateral steps towards disarmament and accept the demands of western peace activists to dismantle the new generation of medium-range Soviet rockets targeted on western Europe, which had provoked a matching deployment of US Cruise missiles in western Europe targeted on the Soviet Union. In 1986, this policy was put into the context of a new international philosophy. Gorbachev and his close ally, Alexander Yakovlev, argued that the world was interdependent, and that because of the horror of nuclear annihilation, the “universal values of mankind” outweighed any divisions on class lines. This meant, in essence, that the clash between capitalism and socialism was no longer the fundamental principle of Soviet policy. It also suggested that the concept of nuclear deterrence on which the cold war was based had lost its validity. It won Gorbachev massive support among ordinary people in the west. Politicians such as Reagan and Thatcher were forced onto the defensive. Also in 1986, just a year after coming to power, he signalled that he wanted to withdraw from Afghanistan. A year later, in 1987, he was saying that eastern European states were free to develop their own roads to socialism.\nThe weak part of perestroika was the failure of his economic reforms and his refusal to tackle agriculture. In the field of consumer goods and services, he went beyond Andropov in allowing individuals to start small businesses, though these often fell foul of local bureaucrats who refused to give them licences. Frustrated, he increasingly saw the problem as coming from party officials resisting or sabotaging his reforms. He sacked a number of lower-level officials and senior politburo members, though it took him three years to understand that they were being replaced by equally obstructive clones. This was what led to the second stage of the Gorbachev reforms, as he decided that the system had to change, and not just the men who ran it. “I must tell you frankly,” he told the Polish parliament in 1988, “in the beginning, we did not understand the need, or rather the inevitability, of reforming the political system. Our experience during the first stage of perestroika brought us to it.” The vehicle chosen was a new Soviet parliament, or Congress of People’s Deputies. Gorbachev summoned a special party conference in June 1988 and persuaded it to accept the idea of a new elected chamber. He wanted the government to be answerable to the new body rather than the party, thus preventing the party from interfering in day-to-day government issues and confining it to a strategic role. “You can’t have two bears in the same cave,” he explained later. Two-thirds of the parliament’s members would be directly elected in a competitive poll. Inevitably, this meant that candidates would be free to campaign and that the old restrictions on freedom of assembly and speech would have to be lifted.\nBetween January 1989 and the elections in March, Soviet citizens suddenly found themselves free to heckle, debate, shout abuse and criticise the party and government. This was the moment when Gorbachev’s “revolution from above” turned into a “revolution from below”, as thousands took to the streets. At least 30 senior party members failed to get elected. The new congress, when it met in May, produced extraordinary debates. Numerous independents and several anti-communists, such as the dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov, were elected. For two weeks, people were glued to their television sets, hearing unprecedented criticism of the old system. Among the reformers, a key demand soon became the abolition of article six of the constitution, which guaranteed the Communist party’s monopoly on power. Having conceded the right of independents to be elected to the congress, it was hard for Gorbachev to resist the idea of letting them form their own parties. The 1989 congress was the turning point, after which Gorbachev was no longer in control of events. Increasingly, too, he became squeezed between those who wanted to move faster and those who resisted change. His troubles grew worse when the newly elected deputies from the Baltic republics, backed up by mass movements, started to call for economic autonomy and political independence. In eastern Europe, similar movements were emerging, starting in Poland with the old Solidarity trade union, which was relegalised and won elections in June 1989. Gorbachev reacted in amazingly relaxed fashion to the changes in eastern Europe. None of his advisers had predicted that this would be the result of their strategy of non-intervention. They had imagined that reformers within each country’s Communist party would be the main beneficiaries of change. But in eastern Europe the local parties had come overwhelmingly to be seen as traitors to their nations, since they had gone along with Soviet invasions in the 1950s and 60s. Thus, in the first flush of electoral democracy, the communists did badly. With hindsight, Gorbachev’s views can be seen as naive. His merit was not to try to prevent the changes — even when they started to produce a complete rout of the Soviet position when the Berlin wall came down in November 1989. When Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany insisted on rapid reunification and the absorption of what had been East Germany into Nato the following year, Gorbachev acquiesced. By then, he was beset on so many fronts that he had no chance to reconsider his policies. He was simply swept along by events.\nThe same was true inside the Soviet Union, which he cared about far more than the future of eastern Europe. He foolishly tried to resist the Baltic states’ drive to independence, instead of seeing that if he accepted they were a special case he might prevent the independence bug from spreading to the other 12 Soviet republics. As a Russian nationalist, it seemed that he could not understand the psychology of other nations. He was particularly shocked when the overwhelming majority in Ukraine voted to leave the Soviet Union in December 1991. Just as the first three years of Gorbachev’s time as Soviet leader illustrated the occasional importance of an individual in history, the same was true of the last two years. Now, however, the key personality was Yeltsin. Indeed, had it not been for this one man’s driving ambition, Gorbachev might have saved the Soviet Union. But Yeltsin became his bete noire. In a retrospective interview with me in 2011, Gorbachev regretted he had not got Yeltsin out of the way before he became a direct rival: “I was probably too liberal and democratic as regards Yeltsin. I should have sent him as ambassador to Great Britain or maybe a former British colony,” he told me. A contemporary, and like him a former regional party secretary, Yeltsin did not enjoy being part of the Gorbachev team. He first irritated Gorbachev when, in 1987, he asked Gorbachev to be allowed to resign from his position as Moscow party boss – on the eve of the 70th anniversary of the October revolution, an event Gorbachev wanted to celebrate with an image of unity. Yeltsin was fiercely attacked at a subsequent central committee meeting and became Gorbachev’s mortal enemy. But the new congress of people’s deputies provided him with a platform. In 1989, campaigning as a populist critic of party privilege and criticising perestroika for failing to improve the economy, he swept to a landslide victory as the Moscow delegate on the congress, and a seat on the Supreme Soviet. Then, as independence fervour grew in the Baltics, Yeltsin and his supporters saw the potential for developing an alternative power-centre inside Russia itself. They were not the first to seize on what was known as the “Russian idea”. As Gorbachev’s reforms accelerated, party conservatives looked for a way of supplanting him. They pressed for the setting-up of a Russian Communist party, arguing, somewhat bizarrely, that Russians had also suffered inside the union – that the country’s national identity had been submerged into the concept of “Soviet man”.\nAs resistance to reform grew within the party, Gorbachev decided in March 1990 to create an executive presidency, which would allow him to bypass the party altogether. Some advisers urged him to go for direct elections, but he was afraid. He had himself elected by the Soviet parliament instead. It turned out to be a double mistake. Yeltsin had just been elected to the new Russian parliament. Picked as chairman, in early 1991 he followed Gorbachev’s example and created an executive presidency, this time for Russia alone. But Yeltsin made sure there were direct elections, which he won by a landslide in June. Suddenly, Yeltsin looked a more democratic leader than Gorbachev. As Yeltsin began to outflank him, Gorbachev reacted indecisively. In September 1990, pressures from the radicals to move towards a market economy grew massively. For a moment, Gorbachev seemed to accept their views, but the prime minister, Nikolai Ryzhkov, persuaded him to resist, even though perestroika had not produced real consumer benefits. He also appeared indecisive on reforming the Soviet Union. Sections of the army and the KGB were furious with his failure to stop the tide of Baltic independence, and in January 1991 troops mounted a provocative raid on the television tower in the Lithuanian capital, Vilnius, killing 14 demonstrators. The hardliners, backed by the land forces commander, General Valentin Varennikov, hoped the incident would provoke Gorbachev into declaring a state of emergency and clamping down. The violence shocked the liberals around Gorbachev, although he himself took 10 days to react publicly. He refused to take the tough action the hardliners wanted, but did not denounce them either. It was Yeltsin who took the initiative by rushing to offer support to the Baltic leaders. When Gorbachev eventually re-emerged, it was clear that Baltic independence could not be halted. He now embarked on a frenzied round of negotiations for a looser Soviet structure in the hope that this would satisfy the growing calls for autonomy. But known as the Novo-Ogaryovo process (from the country house outside Moscow where the talks were held), the talks brought together only nine of the 15 republics. The three Baltic states, plus Armenia, Georgia and Moldova, declined to take part. Within the party, criticism of Gorbachev’s leadership grew from all sides, and at a central committee plenary meeeting in April 1991 he threatened to resign. The move provoked a crisis. The hardliners had no obvious alternative and the plenum voted to withdraw the issue of his future from the agenda. In his 2011 interview, Gorbachev said he had erred in not resigning from the Communist party and forming a new political party at that time. Had that happened, he argued, he might have saved the union.\nGorbachev left for a holiday in the Crimea, planning to return to Moscow on 20 August to sign the new union treaty his Novo-Ogaryovo process had produced. But the hardliners thought it amounted to the end of the Soviet Union and eight of them, including the KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov, the defence minister Dmitry Yazov and Varennikov, resolved to arrest him and mount a military coup. A delegation sent to his villa at Foros demanded he cede his powers on the grounds of ill-health. Gorbachev refused, and even threatened to kill himself, as he told a small group of journalists who talked to him in Foros as soon as the coup collapsed. The plotters claimed Gorbachev was ill, and his place was being taken by the vice-president Gennady Yanayev. They ordered tanks to take up key positions in Moscow. But it was all hopelessly ill-conceived and hastily planned, and, crucially, the plotters failed to arrest Yeltsin, the directly elected Russian president. His defiance split the army, and on the second day of the coup the junta began to fall apart. Gorbachev was soon freed and brought back to Moscow. When he returned, however, he failed to understand how high Yeltsin’s stock had risen during the coup — and how poorly the party leadership had behaved. No one, for example, had denounced the seizure of power. So when Gorbachev used his first press conference to talk about “renewing” the party, most people felt he was out of touch. Four days later, he came to recognise the new situation, resigning as general secretary and calling on the central committee to disband itself. But, by then, Yeltsin had already issued decrees seizing the Soviet Communist party assets and suspending the newly formed Russian Communist party. The plotters, far from saving the Soviet Union and the Communist parties, had only hastened their demise.\nFrom then on, Gorbachev was doomed. Yeltsin put the KGB and the Soviet foreign ministry under Russian control. In early December, he met the leaders of the other two Slav republics, Ukraine and Belarus, in a hunting lodge near the Polish border. They declared the Soviet Union dead. Three weeks later, on 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned as president and the red flag was lowered from the Kremlin, signifying the end of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev’s years in retirement were energetic and dignified. Although Yeltsin stripped him of his limousine and pegged his pension at a figure that hyperinflation reduced to a few pence a month, he never denounced Yeltsin in personal or vindictive terms. He formed the Gorbachev Foundation, funded largely by his book royalties, to conduct research. He made an ill-starred effort to run in the 1996 Russian presidential election, but was shut out of the state television channels and got few votes. Like other great reformers in history, he ended up in isolation, condemned by some for doing too much and by others for doing too little. For the world beyond Russia, his great service lay in allowing the cold war to come to an end. It did not end as he had hoped – in a grand reconciliation between east and west. Indeed, in retirement he criticised western leaders for expanding Nato to take in several of the former Soviet republics, which he thought was unnecessary and provocative. Inside Russia, his economic reforms failed, though not as catastrophically as those that followed under Yeltsin. Yeltsin’s circle blamed Gorbachev for the miserable legacy they inherited. Gorbachev, for his part, blamed the legacy of Stalinism for the situation he took over. He will be remembered as the man who consigned the one-party system to oblivion and gave Russians room to breathe. Yeltsin’s successor Vladimir Putin treated Gorbachev with respect despite Gorbachev’s occasional criticisms of the slide back towards authoritarianism. In 1953 he married Raisa Titarenko; she died in 1999. Their daughter, Irina, survives him. • Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, politician and statesman, born 2 March 1931; died 30 August 2022 • This article was amended on 31 August 2022. A caption to an earlier image, since removed, incorrectly suggested that Margaret Thatcher was the UK prime minister in 1993.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T08:50:11Z'}, {'id': '630e8d9b8f087b68583185a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Until his very last day, Mikhail Gorbachev lived in a dual reality – loved and celebrated in Washington, Paris and London, but reviled by large numbers of Russians who never forgave him for the turbulence that his reforms unleashed.\nHis policy of ‘glasnost’, or openness, gave Russians previously unthinkable levels of freedom, but for many, his rule will be remembered by the dramatic plunge in living standards that followed. Others, haunted by Soviet nostalgia, saw Gorbachev as the destroyer of their empire and blame his policies for emboldening nationalists who successfully pushed for independence in the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and elsewhere across the former Soviet bloc. In a 2021 poll, more than 70% of Russians said their country had moved in a negative direction during his rule, while he was previously ranked as the most unpopular Russian leader of the past century, a state-run pollster said. Gorbachev was never blind to the criticism, and while he always defended democratic credentials, he came to realise that many in the country were looking for a different type of leadership. “A czar must conduct himself like a czar. And that I don’t know how to do,” he once said. His relationship with Vladimir Putin always remained complicated. In an essay published in Time magazine in 2016, Gorbachev attacked Putin’s decision to run for a third presidency, calling his policies “an obstacle to progress”. Putin in turn, famously referred to the end of the Soviet Union as “the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century”. On Tuesday night, Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said the Russian leader deeply regretted the death of Gorbachev and would send a condolence telegram to the family in the morning.\nGorbachev will, however, be mourned among Russia’s increasingly suppressed liberal circles, many of whom have fled the country since the start of the war in Ukraine. “Gorbachev is a monumental politician … There has never been such freedom in Russia as in the late 80s and early 90s. This is his merit,” wrote the veteran Russian journalist Mikhail Fishman, in one of many tributes that quickly started to pour in following the news of his death. “We have all become orphans. But not everyone has understood it yet,” said Alexei Venediktov, a friend and the former head of the Ekho Moskvy radio station which was forced off air over its coverage of the war in Ukraine.\nGorbachev had himself helped kickstart independent Russian journalism, using part of his 1993 Nobel peace prize money to help set up the newspaper Novaya Gazeta, a paper which went on to become the country’s most praised independent newspaper, shedding light on some of Russia’s darkest chapters. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Novaya Gazeta was also forced to cease its operations. Few knew Gorbachev better than his biographer, William Taubman, who in 2017 wrote that Gorbachev’s main issue was that Russia simply had no real experience with the freedom it was being offered. One of the last to visit Gorbachev in hospital on 30 June was the liberal economist Ruslan Grinberg. “He gave us all freedom – but we don’t know what to do with it,” Grinberg said, after his visit to his old friend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T14:24:25Z'}, {'id': '630e82ca8f087b6858318568', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev lived long enough to see everything he had tried to achieve crumble or get blown up. The era of detente and arms control between Washington and Moscow has been replaced by a bloody war in Ukraine in which US and Nato weaponry is being pitted against Russian forces with the accompanying risk of a direct clash between the nuclear superpowers by accident or miscalculation.\nBy the time Gorbachev stepped down at the end of 1991, the Nato-Soviet frontier was no longer a flashpoint. Nato pulled all but a few thousand troops back from the eastern flank, and the terrors of the cold war seemed consigned to history books and museums. In the wake of the Ukraine invasion in February, Nato has rushed troops eastwards, mobilising 40,000 troops under its direct command, with plans to put 300,000 on high alert. Gorbachev, who was turning 91 and already in poor health when the invasion began, issued a statement through his foundation in the days after Russia’s all-out offensive calling for “an early cessation of hostilities and immediate start of peace negotiations”. “There is nothing more precious in the world than human lives,” the statement said. A journalist who had remained close to Gorbachev said in July that the former Soviet leader was “upset” by what he saw. “Gorbachev’s reforms – political, not economic – were all destroyed,” the journalist Alexei Venediktov, the editor of the Ekho Moskvy radio station, told the Russian Forbes magazine. “Nilch, zero, ashes.” Gorbachev’s former interpreter, Pavel Palazhchenko, who works for the Gorbachev Centre thinktank, told Fox News two days before the invasion: “He always warned things could happen that could be very dangerous between Russia and Ukraine, but he always did what he could in order to bring those two nations closer together rather than see a continuation of this rift that we now see widening. So for him, emotionally, it is very tragic.” Gorbachev was a champion of arms control and even discussed the potential elimination of nuclear weapons with Ronald Reagan at the Reykjavik summit in 1986. Now, the last remaining agreement between US and Russia limiting nuclear weapons is being corroded by Russia’s suspension of mutual inspections. Both countries are modernising their arsenals and Putin has made a point of threatening nuclear use. This year, the number of nuclear warheads around the world will rise for the first time since the cold war.\nGorbachev hoped to fundamentally change the mindset of a country that had never experienced democracy, having gone straight from Romanov to Bolshevik dictatorships. The last days of the Soviet Union under Gorbachev’s glasnost (openness) policy were more conducive to freedom of expression than Putin’s Russia where any hint of criticism can bring a jail term. People have been imprisoned for ironically holding up a blank piece of card. Venediktov’s radio station Ekho Moskvy was closed down and the Jewish journalist found a pig’s head and antisemitic abuse left outside his door. Gorbachev closed down the gulags; Putin’s leading opponent, Alexei Navalny, having survived poisoning, is currently languishing in a penal colony where he has been put in solitary confinement for the third time in a month. Gorbachev was increasingly careful about what he said about Putin in public, and praised him for consolidating the Russian state after the chaos under Boris Yeltsin. But in 2011, he had a warning for what was to come. “It’s perhaps understandable that during the initial phase he used certain authoritarian methods in his leadership, but using authoritarian methods as a policy for the future – that I think is wrong. I think that’s a mistake,” he said at a public event in the US. “Wherever you go … you see that where you have leaders that rule for 20 years or more … the only thing that is important in such situations for those leaders and people around them is holding on to power,” he said. “I believe that this is something that is happening now in our country.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T14:02:41Z'}, {'id': '0849caef-db1d-4d02-9bf3-9d51e239de2f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Soviet leader whose reforms led to the unlooked for break-up of his own country, and to the demise of communism across central and eastern Europe, has died in Moscow aged 91. Celebrated abroad as the saviour who delivered freedom to millions of Soviet citizens, he was often blamed at home for the chaotic years that followed, and survived long enough to watch Russia return to autocracy under the rule of Vladimir Putin. Gorbachev, who won the Nobel peace prize in 1990, had died after a “difficult and protracted illness”, Russian news agencies cited hospital officials as saying on Tuesday. Recent reports suggested he was suffering from a kidney ailment. Gorbachev was the the first and last president of the Soviet Union. He became the general secretary of the Communist party in 1985, aged just 53, a post he held until the party was itself dissolved in 1991, with the Soviet Union vanishing soon afterwards. His decision not to use force to prevent the toppling of the Berlin Wall, he later claimed, may have averted a third world war.\nJoe Biden said he was a man of “remarkable vision”, and that he was held in high esteem for leading his country on the path to reform. “These were the acts of a rare leader – one with the imagination to see that a different future was possible and the courage to risk his entire career to achieve it,” the US president said in a statement. “The result was a safer world and greater freedom for millions of people.” António Guterres, secretary general of the United Nations, described Gorbachev as a “towering leader, committed multilateralist, and tireless advocate for peace”. A spokesman to Putin, with whom Gorbachev said he had a strained relationship, said that the Kremlin leader expressed his “deep condolences” on his death and would send a telegram to his family in the morning. Gorbachev will be buried in Moscow’s Novodevichy Cemetery next to his wife, Raisa, reports said. Gorbachev will be associated with his attempts to modernise and to improve the Soviet Union, a process that he ultimately lost control of, leading to the country’s collapse. He told the Guardian in 2011 that one of his proudest achievements was his policy of perestroika – restructuring – which was designed to resuscitate a moribund economy and to bring about change. With it was glasnost or openness, a concept encompassing liberalism and pluralism after decades of censorship and official lies.\nAs well as domestic reform, Gorbachev ushered in a new era of detente with the west, one that has come to a decisive end with Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and Russia’s return to international isolation. Gorbachev had barely commented on the war publicly, beyond his foundation making an early call for “an early cessation of hostilities and immediate start of peace negotiations”. In the past, he had spoken in support of Putin’s decision to annex Crimea in 2014, saying he would have done the same if he had been in the Russian leader’s place. He was banned from Ukraine for five years for his remarks. But Alexei Venediktov, a friend and the former head of the Ekho Moskvy radio station, recently said that in private Gorbachev was “upset” by the war and suggested that, under Putin, his “life’s work” had been “destroyed”. It was Gorbachev’s reluctance to use force solutions that would later earn him the Nobel peace prize. He dumped the Brezhnev doctrine, by which Moscow reserved the right to crush dissent within the client states of the Warsaw Pact. He also forged relationships with world leaders, befriending Margaret Thatcher, who famously said of Moscow’s young, new premier: “We can do business together.” Gorbachev also warmed to Ronald Reagan, with whom he agreed in 1986 to reduce medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe and who later urged Gorbachev to “tear down!” the Berlin Wall.\nIn 1988, Gorbachev withdrew troops from the Soviet disaster in Afghanistan. And in summer 1989, he said that communist countries were free to determine their own internal affairs. They did, in a series of mostly peaceful revolutions that swept across Poland, Hungary, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and – more violently – Romania. At home, Gorbachev struggled to control secessionist claims by the constituent republics of his empire: the Baltic states, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia. This was a bloodier affair. By 1990-91, the Communist party’s grip was slipping. Gorbachev’s own position was becoming wobblier too, as hardliners sought to arrest the Soviet Union’s nascent implosion. In August 1991, a group of ultra-conservatives seized power in a coup while Gorbachev was on holiday in the Crimea. Their reign lasted three days. The man who brought it to an end was Boris Yeltsin, the newly elected president of the Russian Federation. Gorbachev remained in office until late 1991, presiding over the Soviet Union’s rapid collapse, as successive republics including Ukraine voted for independence. He exited the political stage on 27 December. It remains a rarity for a Kremlin leader to step down voluntarily. In an interview with the Guardian in 2011, he still appeared bitter over the rise of his arch-rival: “I was probably too liberal and democratic as regards Yeltsin. I should have sent him as ambassador to Great Britain or maybe a former British colony,” he said. Yet his decision to step down remains a singular and respected act among many Russian liberals today. After visiting Gorbachev in hospital on 30 June, the liberal economist Ruslan Grinberg told the armed forces news outlet Zvezda: “He gave us all freedom – but we don’t know what to do with it.” Alexei Kudrin, a liberal Russian politician who has remained in government, said that Gorbachev’s ideas had “given the country and the whole world a new breath”. Out of office, Gorbachev founded a charity, Green Cross International, which focused on the toxic nuclear and environmental legacy of the cold war. He made various tries to re-enter politics including an attempted comeback in the 1996 presidential election. All were unsuccessful. The Soviet hardliners may have been defeated, but by 2000 it was their protege – the unsmiling ex-KGB spy Putin – who was in the Kremlin. Gorbachev’s relationship with Putin was mixed. He approved Putin’s revisionist policy in foreign affairs, including Russia’s 2008 war in Georgia, and the 2014 annexation of the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea.\nBut Gorbachev took a dim view of Putin’s slow, systematic squashing of civil society. In several notable speeches he accused him of turning the United Russia party into a bad copy of the Communist party, and of blatant authoritarianism. “He thinks that democracy stands in his way,” Gorbachev said of Putin in 2010. For its part, Russia’s state media’s has cast Gorbachev in the role of enemy. It has variously portrayed him as a CIA stooge and the man responsible for the Soviet Union’s collapse – “the greatest political catastrophe of the 20th century”, as Putin put it. Mostly, it has ignored him. In his last years, when he was an active campaigner for charity, following the death of his wife Raisa to cancer, Gorbachev was a paradoxical figure. Abroad, he was viewed as the hero of the cold war, whose actions – or lack of them – ushered in a freer world. In Russia he was largely reviled and unloved, an unperson at best, a traitor at worst.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T14:09:10Z'}, {'id': '630dc2e88f08237696476c8e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'British charities and Pakistani diaspora groups have raised at least £1m after devastating floods in the south Asian country have killed more than 1,000 people, and affected about 30 million. Pakistan is the eighth most at-risk country globally from the impacts of climate change. In the last decade, it has suffered an estimated $18bn in damages due to disasters, including the deadliest floods in the country’s history in 2010, which left more than 2,000 people dead and millions homeless. Now as people struggle once again to access necessities such as food and medical care, Pakistan’s government has appealed for financial help from international donors and aid agencies. Aleena Khan, a Pakistani living in London who has family living in north-western Pakistan, where flooding from the Swat River has affected tens of thousands of people, began fundraising on Instagram. “The devastation is just unimaginable,” Khan said. “The entire infrastructure of roads, bridges, has collapsed. There’s people literally of all ages, genders, people in all their diversity, that are being swallowed by water.” Early on when international charities were not reaching far-flung areas in Pakistan, Khan planned to raise funds to send to her family still in a flood-stricken area of Swat, so that they could work on relief efforts directly or pass them on to organisations working in Pakistan. What started as a small appeal on Instagram aimed at friends and family exploded into donations pouring in from all over the world. “We have had an overwhelming response,” Khan said, her voice heavy with emotion. “Literally just over this weekend, we’ve collected over £7,000 [in the UK]. “We’re receiving donations from Australia, America, the UK, [and from] across Europe,” Khan added. “It’s really touching how people trust us.” The donations have gone on to support volunteer-led efforts with Pakistan’s Red Crescent Society, who have distributed food rations, menstrual hygiene kits, water, and bedding in Khyber Pukhtunkhwa’s DI Khan district. British Muslims (43% who are of Pakistani origin) reported to be among the most charitable in the country and British Muslim charities have began raising funds for emergency relief. Mariam Kadodia, the national fundraising manager for Islamic Relief, confirmed that the charity had raised at least £700,000. “There’s a significant diaspora community in the UK. They feel it because it’s their country, it’s their ancestors’ country and they want to respond,” Kadodia said, adding the wider British Muslim community had also been donating. Yasrab Shah, the director of fundraising for another British charity, Muslim Hands, confirmed the charity had raised at least £200,000 in emergency relief funds. Other charities including Khalsa Aid are working with local journalists and women in Pakistan, to assess how they can provide women with menstrual products and specialised clothing. In a letter addressed to Boris Johnson, Yasmin Qureshi, the Labour MP for Bolton South East and chair of the all party parliamentary group on Pakistan, said about £1.5m of financial aid pledged by the UK government to assist with the immediate aftermath of the floods was “insufficient”. The sentiment that more needed to be done is one also echoed by Khan. “We really need to see more from governments and from international organisations,” she said. “In a natural disaster, in moments like this, we can’t wait. There is no time. The need is now, so whatever you can do as an individual, please do it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T21:15:00Z'}, {'id': '630e4de78f08fa7e6340c679', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged Russian soldiers to flee for their lives after his forces launched an offensive to retake southern Ukraine. A senior presidential adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, cautioned Ukrainians not to expect rapid gains and described the offensive as a “slow operation to grind the enemy”. The former head of Britain’s secret intelligence service, MI6, has welcomed Ukraine’s counterattacks in Kherson, saying it is a key moment in the war. Sir Alex Younger told the BBC that the fightback from Kyiv showed the two opposing forces had “reached some kind of balance, which is an unexpected and frankly welcome situation”. The Kremlin has insisted that its so-called “special military operation” in Ukraine is going to plan despite the news that Kyiv’s troops have launched a long-awaited counteroffensive in the south of the country. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said: “The special military operation continues, it continues methodically, and in coordination with the current plans. All objectives will be fulfilled.” A Moscow-installed leader of occupied Kherson has reportedly fled to Russia after Kyiv announced it had begun its long-awaited counterattack aimed at taking back the southern region from Russian forces. When asked by the Guardian about his location, Kirill Stremousov said he was currently “travelling around Russian cities, meeting different people for work”. At least four people were killed and four wounded in Russian shelling of Kharkiv, the regional governor said. Writing on the Telegram messaging app, Oleh Synehubov said: “As a result of the shelling of the central part of Kharkiv, at least four people died and four more were injured.” Volodymyr Zelenskiy has met the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi, and his delegation ahead of the group’s visit to the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. A key adviser to Ukraine’s president accused Russian forces of deliberately shelling corridors for the IAEA inspectors to force them through Crimea and parts of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions temporarily occupied by Moscow’s forces. The European Commission has said it will donate 5.5m potassium iodide tablets to Ukraine amid fears that fighting in the area of the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant could lead to nuclear catastrophe. The commission said it had received a request from the Ukrainian government for potassium iodide tablets “as a preventative safety measure” to increase the level of protection around the nuclear plant. The first shipment of grain from Ukraine to the drought-stricken Horn of Africa since the war began has docked in Djibouti. The UN-chartered vessel Brave Commander is carrying 23,000 tonnes of Ukrainian wheat and will soon be followed by another carrying 7,000 tonnes. The total shipment, which will be unloaded in Djibouti and transported to Ethiopia, is enough to feed 1.5m people for a month. Ukraine has deployed a fleet of dummy rockets to trick Russian forces into wasting expensive long-range missiles on pointless targets, according to reports. At least 10 Russian cruise missiles have reportedly been fired by Moscow’s naval fleet in the Black Sea at the dummy targets, which are made of wood but look like US-supplied advanced rocket launcher systems when spotted by Russian drones, the Washington Post reports. Germany and France have issued a joint warning against a ban on tourist visas for Russians, saying such a step would be counter-productive. The split on tourist visas will be at the heart of a meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers in Prague on Tuesday and Wednesday as they discuss what further steps they can take to sanction Russia for its six-month old invasion of Ukraine. The UN’s cultural agency has said it supports a bid by Ukraine to put its port city of Odesa on the Unesco world heritage list of protected sites. The UN agency also said it wants to add Odesa, Kyiv and Lviv to the list of world heritage sites “in danger”. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war blog today. Thanks for following along. I’ll be back tomorrow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T18:37:00Z'}, {'id': '630e4db98f087b68583183ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more on the meeting between Volodymyr Zelenskiy and the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi, in Kyiv today. Grossi arrived in the Ukrainian capital late on Monday at the head of a 14-strong team before a visit to the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Zelenskiy said the mission was “probably one of the top-priority questions regarding the safety of Ukraine and the world today”, and called for the “immediate de-militarisation of the plant” and its transfer to “full Ukrainian control”. The Ukrainian president said he hoped the delegation would “find an opportunity, thanks to our special services, thanks to the security corridors, to get to the station and do the best to avoid all those threats on a global scale”. He also urged the mission to do more than inspect the plant, saying that strategic decisions were required “regarding the urgent demilitarisation of the station, the withdrawal of all, any, military personnel of the Russian Federation with explosives, with any kind of weapon”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T17:58:03Z'}, {'id': '630e451f8f087b685831836d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN’s cultural agency has said it supports a bid by Ukraine to put its port city of Odesa on the Unesco world heritage list of protected sites. The historic centre of Odesa has already been “struck by artillery fire” and is “located only a few dozen kilometres from the front line”, the agency said in a statement.\nThe statement followed a meeting of the agency’s director, Audrey Azoulay, and Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, in Paris. The agency added: On 24 July 2022, part of the large glass roof and windows of Odesa’s Museum of Fine Arts, inaugurated in 1899, were destroyed. It said it had mobilised experts to support Ukraine so that the nomination can be examined urgently by World Heritage Committee member states. The UN agency also said it wants to add Odesa, Kyiv and Lviv to the list of world heritage sites “in danger”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T17:21:45Z'}, {'id': '630e3f9f8f087b6858318320', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian state prosecutors have requested a 24-year prison term for the former journalist, Ivan Safronov, who is on trial for treason, his defence team has told Russian media. Safronov, 32, was one of Russia’s most respected journalists covering defence for the Kommersant and Vedomosti newspapers. He was arrested in July 2020 after leaving journalism to serve as an aide to the head of Russia’s space agency. He has been accused by Russia’s FSB security service of collecting military secrets about Russian arms sales in the Middle East and Africa and handing them over to the Czech Republic. Safronov has denied the charges and described the trial as “a complete travesty of justice”. Speaking to the Russian state-owned news agency, Ria, after a closed-door hearing, Safronov’s lawyer, Dmitry Katchev, said: The prosecutor asked to sentence Ivan to 24 years in a strict regime penal colony. Safronov’s previous lawyer, Yevgeny Smirnov, said on Facebook that his former client had turned down an offer of 12 years in jail in return for a guilty plea. The verdict in his case will be announced on 5 September, Russian news agencies said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T17:16:21Z'}, {'id': '630e398b8f087b68583182d7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has met the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi, and his delegation ahead of the group’s visit to the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. From the Ukrainian broadcaster Suspilne:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T16:32:07Z'}, {'id': '630e33498f08fa7e6340c515', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The deputy head of the Russian-installed administration in Ukraine’s occupied Kherson region, Kirill Stremousov, said in a telephone interview that “everything in Kherson was under control”, claiming that Ukrainian spies and saboteurs were killed near Kherson’s Tavriiskyi neighbourhood on Tuesday. Earlier in the day, reports emerged that Stremousov had left Kherson after a video he posted appeared to indicate he was located in Voronezh, a Russian city some 600 miles from Kherson. When asked by the Guardian about his location, Stremousov said he was currently “travelling around Russian cities, meeting different people for work”. He said: I don’t have to sit [in Kherson]. I am the deputy head of the region and have the opportunity to move around … These are working trips. “Kherson will remain my base,” he added, denying he left Kherson out of safety concerns. Stremousov became the most senior Russian-appointed official in Kherson after the local governor, Volodymyr Saldo, was taken to hospital amid a suspected poisoning earlier in the summer. Stremousov’s apparent departure from Kherson comes after another Russian-appointed official in the region, Alexei Kovalev, was shot dead in his home over the weekend. In the past months, a number of Ukrainian nationals appointed by Russian forces in occupied territory have been killed or wounded in apparent partisan attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T16:28:48Z'}, {'id': '630e2d7b8f08fa7e6340c4bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Moscow-installed leader of occupied Kherson has reportedly fled to Russia, one day after Kyiv announced it had begun its long-awaited counter attack aimed at taking back the southern region from Russian forces. Kirill Stremousov, who was appointed deputy head of the Russian-backed Kherson military-civilian administration, has published regular video updates to state-owned Russian news outlets and his Telegram account. But a Ukrainian activist, Serhii Sternenko, has claimed Stremousov is no longer in Kherson and has instead been filming his recent video updates somewhere near the Cathedral of Annunciation in Voronezh in Russia, which can be seen in the background. Voronezh is almost 500 miles from Kherson and about 120 miles from the border with Ukraine. In a series of tweets, Sternenko wrote: Traitor to Ukraine and collaborator Stremousov escaped from Kherson and says that Kherson will forever remain Russian ... from Voronezh to Russia.\nHe went on to claim that Stremousov was filming his videos from a Marriott hotel in Voronezh.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T15:47:54Z'}, {'id': '630e254c8f08fa7e6340c44c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A selection of images showing recent developments in Ukraine have dropped on the picture wires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T15:40:22Z'}, {'id': '630e1efb8f08fa7e6340c3dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former head of Britain’s secret intelligence service, MI6, has welcomed Ukraine’s counterattacks in Kherson, saying it is a key moment in the war. Sir Alex Younger told the BBC that the fightback from Kyiv showed the two opposing forces had “reached some kind of balance, which is an unexpected and frankly welcome situation”. He added that western help had strengthened Ukrainian capability and that there was a long-term trend showing Russian military capability had slowly weakened. He said the new offensive in Kherson from Zelenskiy’s forces was “all about the urge of Ukraine to demonstrate they can get on the front foot”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T14:46:08Z'}, {'id': '630e19178f08fa7e6340c396', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s nearly 5.30pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged Russian soldiers to flee for their lives after his forces launched an offensive to retake southern Ukraine. A senior presidential adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, told Ukrainians not to expect rapid gains and described the offensive as a “slow operation to grind the enemy”. The Kremlin has insisted that its so-called “special military operation” in Ukraine is going to plan despite the news that Kyiv’s troops have launched a long-awaited counteroffensive in the south of the country. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said: “The special military operation continues, it continues methodically, and in co-ordination with the current plans. All objectives will be fulfilled.” Kherson has been hit by a partial power outage and a partial shutdown of the water supply, Russian state news agencies have cited pro-Russian officials as saying. Traffic lights and building lights have also been reported going off in the Moscow-held region, according to Russian media. At least four people were killed and four wounded in Russian shelling of Kharkiv, the regional governor said. Writing on the Telegram messaging app, Oleh Synehubov said: “As a result of the shelling of the central part of Kharkiv, at least 4 people died and 4 more were injured.” A team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog have arrived in Kyiv en route to inspect the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team will visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday. A key adviser to Ukraine’s president accused Russian forces of deliberately shelling corridors for the IAEA inspectors to force them through Crimea and parts of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions temporarily occupied by Moscow’s forces. The European Commission has said it will donate 5.5m potassium iodide tablets to Ukraine amid fears that fighting in the area of the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant could lead to nuclear catastrophe. The Commission said it had received a request from the Ukrainian government for potassium iodide tablets “as a preventative safety measure” to increase the level of protection around the nuclear plant. The first shipment of grain from Ukraine to the drought-stricken Horn of Africa since the war began has docked in Djibouti. The UN-chartered vessel Brave Commander is carrying 23,000 tonnes of Ukrainian wheat and will soon be followed by another carrying 7,000 tonnes. The total shipment, which will be unloaded in Djibouti and transported to Ethiopia, is enough to feed 1.5m people for a month. Ukraine has deployed a fleet of dummy rockets to trick Russian forces into wasting expensive long-range missiles on pointless targets, according to reports. At least 10 Russian cruise missiles have reportedly been fired by Moscow’s naval fleet in the Black Sea at the dummy targets, which are made of wood but look like US-supplied advanced rocket launcher systems when spotted by Russian drones, the Washington Post reports. Russia is reportedly struggling to find more soldiers to fight in Ukraine and has expanded recruitment efforts by eliminating the upper age limit and by tapping into prisons. The Pentagon believes that any more recruits added may not effectively expand overall combat power by the end of the year, according to a US official. Several brigades of the Ukrainian armed forces increased the weight of artillery fires in frontline sectors across southern Ukraine early on Monday, according to British intelligence. Ukrainian long-range precision strikes continue to disrupt Russian resupply; however, it is not yet possible to confirm the extent of Ukrainian advances, the UK Ministry of Defence said in its latest report. Germany and France have issued a joint warning against a ban on tourist visas for Russians, saying such a step would be counter-productive. The split on tourist visas will be at the heart of a meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers in Prague on Tuesday and Wednesday, as they discuss what further steps they can take to sanction Russia for its six-month old invasion of Ukraine. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you today on the Russia-Ukraine war blog. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T14:22:06Z'}, {'id': '630e12228f087b68583180a6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s southern region of Kherson has been hit by a partial power outage, Russian state news agencies have cited pro-Russian officials as saying. Russian media also reported a partial shutdown of the water supply, as well as traffic lights and building lights going off. It comes after Ukrainian forces launched their long-awaited counteroffensive to take back the southern region from Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T13:36:29Z'}, {'id': '630e0c088f087b6858318061', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has condemned the destruction of Soviet war memorials in the three Baltic states and accused them of persecuting their Russian-speaking minorities. In a statement, the Russian foreign ministry accused Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia of being guilty of xenophobia and said they were treating their ethnic Russian minorities as “second-class people”. It claimed Russian-language media, kindergartens and schools were being shut down. Such “Russophobic approaches” will “certainly affect the state of bilateral relations with these countries, which are already in complete decline”, the ministry said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T13:09:53Z'}, {'id': '630e05c58f08fb7d69ffde74', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The first shipment of grain from Ukraine to the drought-stricken Horn of Africa since the war began has docked in Djibouti. The UN-chartered vessel Brave Commander, carrying 23,000 tonnes of Ukrainian wheat, set sail from the Ukrainian port of Yuzhne, east of Odesa, two weeks ago. The vessel is the first specially chartered by the UN’s World Food Programme to unblock food shipments stuck after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.\nIt will soon be followed by another carrying 7,000 tonnes. The total shipment, which will be unloaded in Djibouti and transported to Ethiopia, is enough to feed 1.5 million people for a month. Michael Dunford, the UN’s World Food Programme director for eastern Africa, said: This shipment, the first of many we hope, will allow WFP to deliver this grain to 1.53 million people in Ethiopia and cover their needs for a month. It’s a start but we must continue to keep the food flowing to save lives across the region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T13:19:50Z'}, {'id': '630e022d8f08fa7e6340c2b5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Commission has said it will donate 5.5m potassium iodide tablets to Ukraine amid fears that fighting in the area of the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant could lead to nuclear catastrophe. The Commission said it had received a request from the Ukrainian government for potassium iodide tablets “as a preventative safety measure” to increase the level of protection around the nuclear plant. The tablets would be used “in limited scenarios to avoid that inhaled or swallowed radioactive iodine is absorbed by the thyroid”, the commission said. The EU is “pre-emptively” delivering the potassium iodide tablets to Ukraine to offer people protection “in case of exposure to high levels of radiation”, the commissioner for crisis management, Janez Lenarčič, said in a statement. He added: No nuclear power plant should ever be used as a war theatre. It is unacceptable that civilian lives are put in danger.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T12:37:31Z'}, {'id': '630df87e8f08fb7d69ffddfd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A key adviser to Ukraine’s president has accused Russian forces of deliberately shelling corridors for a team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. Mykhailo Podolyak said Russia was attempting to force the mission from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) through Crimea and parts of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions temporarily occupied by Moscow’s forces. He also reiterated Ukraine’s call to demilitarise the area around the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T11:48:24Z'}, {'id': '630df6b78f08fb7d69ffddf5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has deployed a fleet of dummy rockets to trick Russian forces into wasting expensive long-range missiles on pointless targets, according to reports. The decoys are made of wood but look like US-supplied advanced rocket launcher systems when spotted by Russian drones, the Washington Post reports. At least 10 Russian cruise missiles have reportedly been fired by Moscow’s naval fleet in the Black Sea at the dummy targets, a senior Ukrainian official told the paper. A source said: When the UAVs see the battery, it’s like a VIP target. The initial success of the replicas has left Ukraine to make more of these wooden decoys in a bid to neutralise Russia’s artillery advantage on the battlefield. In addition, the destruction of Ukraine’s fleet of fake Himars may have been behind Russia’s claims that it has taken out a large number of the systems.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T14:18:30Z'}, {'id': '630def3f8f08fb7d69ffdd82', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has insisted that its so-called “special military operation” in Ukraine is going to plan despite the news that Kyiv’s troops have launched a long-awaited counteroffensive in the south of the country. At his regular briefing with reporters, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov was asked to respond to Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s comments that Russian troops should flee after his military reportedly broke through several of their defences on Tuesday. Peskov replied: The special military operation continues, it continues methodically, and in co-ordination with the current plans. All objectives will be fulfilled. He also commented on calls by some European leaders for a ban on tourist visas for Russians, describing the proposals as “irrational” and the latest manifestation of the west’s anti-Russian agenda. He said Europe’s actions towards Russia were “bordering on insanity” adding: Of course, such decisions cannot go unanswered.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T11:50:11Z'}, {'id': '630de7618f08fb7d69ffdd14', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian troops have launched a counterattack in southern Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said, as he vowed to take back Russian-controlled areas, starting with Kherson. The Ukrainian president told the Russian military to flee after his military broke through several Russian defences on Tuesday. “There will be no place [for Russian troops] on Ukrainian land,” he said during his latest address posted to Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T10:33:54Z'}, {'id': '630de5cf8f087b6858317edb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Radiation levels at the Moscow-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant remain normal, according to Russia’s defence ministry. In a statement, the ministry accused Ukrainian forces of firing two artillery shells into the territory of the nuclear power plant. It also claimed that it had a downed Ukrainian drone had crashed into the roof of a building storing nuclear fuel and radioactive waste. It is not possible to independently verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T10:27:08Z'}, {'id': '630ddf8d8f08fa7e6340c109', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is just past 1pm in Ukraine. Here is what you might have missed: Germany and France have issued a joint warning against a ban on tourist visas for Russians, saying such a step would be counter-productive, reports Reuters. The split on tourist visas will be at the heart of a meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers in Prague on Tuesday and Wednesday, as they discuss what further steps they can take to sanction Russia for its six-month old invasion of Ukraine. Defence ministers meeting in Prague are likely to agree in principle on the less controversial step of organising joint military training missions for Ukrainian troops. Russia’s Gazprom has informed Engie it is reducing its gas deliveries, starting Tuesday, due to a disagreement between the parties over contracts, adding to concerns related to energy supplies, the French utility company said. At least four people were killed and four wounded in Russian shelling of Kharkiv, the regional governor said. Writing on the Telegram messaging app, Oleh Synehubov said:”As a result of the shelling of the central part of Kharkiv, at least 4 people died and 4 more were injured.” European Union defence ministers are set to pave the way for the establishment of an EU training mission for Ukrainian forces, the bloc’s top diplomat Josep Borrell said. Reuters reports that Borrell said: “The situation on the ground continues to be very bad. Ukraine needs our support, and we will continue providing support. A general, overall political agreement (on the training mission) is what I think we have to get today … I hope we will have a political green light for this mission.” Russia has faced “numerous failures” with Iranian-made drones acquired from Tehran this month for use in its war with Ukraine, according to a senior US administration official. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the US understood that Russia had received the delivery of Mohajer-6 and Shahed-series unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) over several days this month. The official said it is likely to be part of a Russian plan to acquire hundreds of such vehicles, reports Reuters. Russian forces have killed two people and injured four others in Donetsk, the region’s governor said on Telegram. Pavlo Kyrylenko said the two people were killed in Rozdolne and Pivnichne. Ukrainian troops are mounting a long-awaited counteroffensive in the southern region of Kherson, military officials have said. “Today we started offensive actions in various directions, including in the Kherson region,” Ukraine’s southern command spokesperson, Natalia Humeniuk, said on Monday. She declined to provide more details about the new offensive but said Ukraine’s recent strikes on Russia’s southern logistical routes had “unquestionably weakened the enemy”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, added in a Monday evening address: “If they want to survive, it is time for the Russian military to flee. The occupiers should know: we will oust them to the border. To our border, the line of which has not changed.” Senior adviser to Ukraine’s president Oleksiy Arestovych described the counteroffensive as a “planned slow operation to grind the enemy”. In an update posted to his official Telegram account, Arestovych said: “We do not fight for show-offs and high-profile phrases as an enemy. We fight for a cause. And this thing takes time and effort. Therefore, be patient. This process will not be very fast, but will end with the installation of the Ukrainian flag over all the settlements of Ukraine.” Kyiv’s forces have broken through Russian defences in several sectors of the frontline near the city of Kherson, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy claimed. Oleksiy Arestovych said Ukrainian forces were also shelling the ferries in the Kherson region that Moscow is using to supply Russian-occupied territory on the west bank of the Dnieper River. A separate Ukrainian military source told CNN that its forces have taken back four villages near the city of Kherson after breaking through the frontline in three places, with the main “target” being Kherson. The operation began with heavy shelling of Russian positions and the rear, forcing them to flee, the source was quoted as saying. Ukrainian forces have heightened artillery fire in the south, according to British intelligence. Several brigades of the Ukrainian armed forces increased the weight of artillery fires in front line sectors across southern Ukraine early on Monday, the UK Ministry of Defence said in its latest report. Ukrainian long-range precision strikes also continue to disrupt Russian resupply. A Ukrainian barrage of rockets left the Russian-occupied town of Nova Kakhovka in the Kherson region without water or power, officials at the Russian-appointed local authority told Russia’s RIA news agency. The town lies just to the east of the city of Kherson. A team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog arrived in Kyiv on Monday night en route to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team will visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday. “We must protect the safety and security of Ukraine’s and Europe’s biggest nuclear facility,” Grossi tweeted. Missiles and shells are frequently hitting areas around the power station and nearby towns, prompting fears it may be too dangerous for the mission to proceed. The Kremlin said the IAEA mission was “necessary” but has ruled out vacating the site. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Ukraine expects the IAEA delegation to “state the facts” regarding the violation of all nuclear safety protocols, adding that Russia “is putting not only Ukraine but also the entire world at threat of risk of a nuclear accident”. Russian forces fired at Enerhodar, the city where the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is located, according to Ukraine’s armed forces. Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, also appeared to confirm the reports on his Telegram channel alongside a video of firefighters dousing burning cars. Russia is struggling to find more soldiers to fight in Ukraine and has expanded recruitment efforts by eliminating the upper age limit and by tapping into prisons. “Many of these new recruits have been observed as older, unfit and ill-trained,” a Pentagon official told journalists on Monday. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, decreed last week that his army would increase by about 10%, to 1.15 million service personnel, starting January next year. Ukrainian officials have warned politicians, experts and opinion leaders not to speculate about the progress of a military counteroffensive. A spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern command, Nataliya Humenyuk, said the operation in Kherson needed “silence” as media attention could affect the results. Ukraine’s presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, added it was necessary to wait for official statements from Ukraine’s ministry of defence and army. “I understand our wishes and dreams … But war is not ‘content’. Let’s filter information and work professionally out of respect for our defenders,” he wrote on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T10:40:53Z'}, {'id': '630dd8638f080ba02dce9d34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany and France have issued a joint warning against a ban on tourist visas for Russians, saying such a step would be counter-productive, reports Reuters. The split on tourist visas will be at the heart of a meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers in Prague on Tuesday and Wednesday, as they discuss what further steps they can take to sanction Russia for its six-month old invasion of Ukraine. Defence ministers meeting in Prague are likely to agree in principle on the less controversial step of organising joint military training missions for Ukrainian troops. France and Germany said in the joint memo seen by Reuters: We caution against far-reaching restrictions on our visa policy, in order to prevent feeding the Russian narrative and trigger unintended rallying-around the flag effects and/or estranging future generations. Others, in particular eastern and Nordic member states, have argued strongly for a ban. Denmark’s foreign minister Jeppe Kofod said last week: It is very provocative to me that you see Russian men on European beaches in southern Europe and at the same time Ukrainian men between 18 and 60 years cannot even leave their country but have to fight for their freedom. We think it is right that we together in Europe can limit and cut off tourists from Russia and it would send a clear message to (President) Putin. Russians mostly enter the EU via the land borders of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Finland, Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis said last week, adding that these countries may act on their own if the EU does not agree on a union-wide ban.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T10:41:29Z'}, {'id': '630dcea18f080ba02dce9cdb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s Gazprom has informed Engie it is reducing its gas deliveries, starting today, due to a disagreement between the parties over contracts, adding to concerns related to energy supplies, the French utility company said. A statement reported by Reuters said: As previously announced, Engie had already secured the volumes necessary to meet its commitments towards its customers and its own requirements, and put in place several measures to significantly reduce any direct financial and physical impacts that could result from an interruption to gas supplies by Gazprom. However, a French energy ministry official said the state-owned firm’s move to further reduce its gas deliveries to Engie does not jeopardise the security of France’s energy supplies. The official said: We prepared for it through the diversification of our supply sources and through the maximum replenishment of our stocks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T08:59:39Z'}, {'id': '630dcce68f0876e20fe16ee4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vitaliy Kim, the head of the Mykolayiv regional military administration, said today there has been heavy fighting in the south of the country. In a video posted on Twitter, Kim said military aid for drones and cars had decreased and urged volunteers to “put in the work again” to help get more equipment because the “Kherson liberation is not far off”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T08:54:25Z'}, {'id': '630dc7998f0876e20fe16eaf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least four people were killed and four wounded in Russian shelling of Kharkiv today, the regional governor said. Writing on the Telegram messaging app, Oleh Synehubov said: As a result of the shelling of the central part of Kharkiv, at least 4 people died and 4 more were injured. Kharkiv is the country’s second-largest city and was the subject of fierce attacks in the early stages of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T08:54:46Z'}, {'id': '630dbfff8f08237696476c7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'European Union defence ministers are set to pave the way for the establishment of an EU training mission for Ukrainian forces, the bloc’s top diplomat Josep Borrell said today. Reuters reports that Borrell said: The situation on the ground continues to be very bad. Ukraine needs our support, and we will continue providing support. A general, overall political agreement (on the training mission) is what I think we have to get today … I hope we will have a political green light for this mission. His comments in Prague come hours before talks are set to take place in the city between foreign ministers to discuss a variety of issues, including a possible EU visa ban for Russian tourists.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T08:08:38Z'}, {'id': '630dbc518f080ba02dce9c37', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has faced “numerous failures” with Iranian-made drones acquired from Tehran this month for use in its war with Ukraine, according to a senior US administration official. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the US understood that Russia had received the delivery of Mohajer-6 and Shahed-series unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) over several days this month. The official said it is likely to be part of a Russian plan to acquire hundreds of such vehicles, reports Reuters. “We assess that Russia intends to use these Iranian UAVs, which can conduct air-to-surface attacks, electronic warfare, and targeting, on the battlefield in Ukraine,” the official said. In July, US national security adviser Jake Sullivan told reporters the US has information that shows Iran is preparing to provide Russia with up to several hundred drones.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T07:37:53Z'}, {'id': '630db9ec8f08237696476c50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Isobel Koshiw reports for us from Kyiv: The long-awaited counter-offensive by Ukrainian troops appears to have started in the southern region of Kherson, with the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, saying: “If they want to survive, it is time for the Russian military to flee.” Ukrainian troops have broken through Russian defences in several areas of the frontline near the city of Kherson, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy claimed. Oleksiy Arestovych said in a video interview Ukrainian forces were also shelling the ferries in the Kherson region that Moscow is using to supply Russian-occupied territory on the west bank of the Dnieper River. But he cautioned Ukrainians against expecting a quick win in the south. Read more: Zelenskiy tells Russian forces to flee as Ukraine counteroffensive begins in Kherson', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T07:38:17Z'}, {'id': '630db3808f0876e20fe16df8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have killed two people and injured four others in Donetsk, the region’s governor said on Telegram. Pavlo Kyrylenko said the two people were killed in Rozdolne and Pivnichne.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T10:22:58Z'}, {'id': '630dafbb8f08237696476bf8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian-installed authorities in the Ukrainian city of Enerhodar accused Ukrainian troops today of once again shelling the territory of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Russia’s Tass news agency said. The city authorities said two shells exploded near a spent fuel storage building at the plant, Reuters reports. Ukraine and Russia have repeatedly accused each other of attacking Europe’s biggest nuclear power plant. It is set to be visited this week by a mission of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). IAEA chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team will visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T06:44:28Z'}, {'id': '630da6298f08237696476bb0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 9am in Kyiv. Here is where we stand: Ukrainian troops are mounting a long-awaited counteroffensive in the southern region of Kherson, military officials have said. “Today we started offensive actions in various directions, including in the Kherson region,” Ukraine’s southern command spokesperson, Natalia Humeniuk, said on Monday. She declined to provide more details about the new offensive but said Ukraine’s recent strikes on Russia’s southern logistical routes had “unquestionably weakened the enemy”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, added in a Monday evening address: “If they want to survive, it is time for the Russian military to flee. The occupiers should know: we will oust them to the border. To our border, the line of which has not changed.” Senior adviser to Ukraine’s president Oleksiy Arestovych described the counteroffensive as a “planned slow operation to grind the enemy”. In an update posted to his official Telegram account, Arestovych said: “We do not fight for show-offs and high-profile phrases as an enemy. We fight for a cause. And this thing takes time and effort. Therefore, be patient. This process will not be very fast, but will end with the installation of the Ukrainian flag over all the settlements of Ukraine.” Kyiv’s forces have broken through Russian defences in several sectors of the frontline near the city of Kherson, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy claimed. Oleksiy Arestovych said Ukrainian forces were also shelling the ferries in the Kherson region that Moscow is using to supply Russian-occupied territory on the west bank of the Dnieper River. A separate Ukrainian military source told CNN that its forces have taken back four villages near the city of Kherson after breaking through the frontline in three places, with the main “target” being Kherson. The operation began with heavy shelling of Russian positions and the rear, forcing them to flee, the source was quoted as saying. Ukrainian forces have heightened artillery fire in the south, according to British intelligence. Several brigades of the Ukrainian armed forces increased the weight of artillery fires in front line sectors across southern Ukraine early on Monday, the UK Ministry of Defence said in its latest report. Ukrainian long-range precision strikes also continue to disrupt Russian resupply. A Ukrainian barrage of rockets left the Russian-occupied town of Nova Kakhovka in the Kherson region without water or power, officials at the Russian-appointed local authority told Russia’s RIA news agency. The town lies just to the east of the city of Kherson. A team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog arrived in Kyiv on Monday night en route to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team will visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday. “We must protect the safety and security of Ukraine’s and Europe’s biggest nuclear facility,” Grossi tweeted. Missiles and shells are frequently hitting areas around the power station and nearby towns, prompting fears it may be too dangerous for the mission to proceed. The Kremlin said the IAEA mission was “necessary” but has ruled out vacating the site. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Ukraine expects the IAEA delegation to “state the facts” regarding the violation of all nuclear safety protocols, adding that Russia “is putting not only Ukraine but also the entire world at threat of risk of a nuclear accident”. Russian forces fired at Enerhodar, the city where the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is located, according to Ukraine’s armed forces. Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, also appeared to confirm the reports on his Telegram channel alongside a video of firefighters dousing burning cars. Russia is struggling to find more soldiers to fight in Ukraine and has expanded recruitment efforts by eliminating the upper age limit and by tapping into prisons. “Many of these new recruits have been observed as older, unfit and ill-trained,” a Pentagon official told journalists on Monday. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, decreed last week that his army would increase by about 10%, to 1.15 million servicemen, starting January next year. Ukrainian officials have warned politicians, experts and opinion leaders not to speculate about the progress of a military counteroffensive. Spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern command, Nataliya Humenyuk, said the operation in Kherson needed “silence” as media attention could affect the results. Ukraine’s presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, added it was necessary to wait for official statements from Ukraine’s ministry of defence and army. “I understand our wishes and dreams … But war is not ‘content’. Let’s filter information and work professionally out of respect for our defenders,” he wrote on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T06:27:25Z'}, {'id': '630da74d8f080ba02dce9b90', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Senior adviser to Ukraine’s president Oleksiy Arestovych has given more details on the Ukrainian counteroffensive in Kherson. In an update posted to his official Telegram account, Arestovych said: Today began an active part of the liberation of the south from the Russian invaders. This is a planned slow operation to grind the enemy, saving the lives of our military and civilians. Of course, many would like a large-scale offensive with news about the capture by our military of a settlement in an hour. But we don’t fight like that. Yes, funds are limited. We do not fight for show-offs and high-profile phrases as an enemy. We fight for a cause. And this thing takes time and effort. Therefore, be patient. This process will not be very fast, but will end with the installation of the Ukrainian flag over all the settlements of Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T06:32:36Z'}, {'id': '630d3f458f080ba02dce993d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is reportedly struggling to find more soldiers to fight in Ukraine and has expanded recruitment efforts by eliminating the upper age limit and by tapping into prisons. “Many of these new recruits have been observed as older, unfit and ill-trained,” a Pentagon official told journalists on Monday. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, decreed last week that his army would increase by about 10%, to 1.15 million servicemen, starting January next year. After experiencing significant setbacks and heavy troop losses in six months after invading Ukraine, the Pentagon believes that “this effort is unlikely to succeed, as Russia has historically not met personnel and strength targets,” the official said. The Pentagon’s conclusion is that any more recruits added may not effectively expand overall combat power by the end of the year, according to the official.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T05:51:48Z'}, {'id': '630d98f48f080ba02dce9b3f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Several brigades of the Ukrainian armed forces increased the weight of artillery fires in frontline sectors across southern Ukraine early on Monday, according to British intelligence. Ukrainian long-range precision strikes continue to disrupt Russian resupply; however, it is not yet possible to confirm the extent of Ukrainian advances, the UK Ministry of Defence said in its latest report.\nThe full report reads: Since the start of August, Russia has made significant efforts to reinforce its force on the western bank of the Dnipro River around Kherson. The Southern Military District’s (SMD) 49th Combined Arms Army has highly likely been augmented with components of the Eastern Military District’s (EMD) 35th Combined Arms Army. Most of the units around Kherson are likely under-manned and are reliant upon fragile supply lines by ferry and pontoon bridges across the Dnipro. This integration of SMD and EMD units suggests a significant reorganisation of Russia’s force in Ukraine. There is a realistic possibility that Russia has moved to rationalise the several, semi-independent, operational commands which contributed to its poor performance early in the invasion. If Ukraine succeeds in undertaking sustained offensive operations, the cohesion of this untested structure will likely be a key factor in the sustainability of Russian defences in the south.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T06:28:02Z'}, {'id': '630d632b8f080ba02dce9a15', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A team of experts assembled by the UN nuclear watchdog will inspect the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine from Wednesday. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team arrived in Kyiv on Monday night.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T05:41:55Z'}, {'id': '630d443b8f0823769647698d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog have arrived in Kyiv en route to inspect the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team will visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday. “We must protect the safety and security of Ukraine’s and Europe’s biggest nuclear facility,” Grossi tweeted.\nThe IAEA added: “Rafael Grossi and a team of experts and inspectors have set off for the IAEA support and assistance mission to Zaporizhzhia (ISAMZ), to help ensure nuclear safety and security at Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia NPP and undertake vital safeguards activities.” Missiles and shells are frequently hitting areas around the power station and nearby towns, prompting fears it may be too dangerous for the mission to proceed. The Kremlin said the IAEA mission was “necessary” but has ruled out vacating the site. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Ukraine expects the IAEA delegation to “state the facts” regarding the violation of all nuclear safety protocols, adding that Russia “is putting not only Ukraine but also the entire world at threat of risk of a nuclear accident”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T05:14:46Z'}, {'id': '630d82e68f080ba02dce9abd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence ministry acknowledged a new Ukrainian offensive had been launched in the Mykolaiv and Kherson regions but said it had failed and the Ukrainians had suffered significant casualties, RIA news agency reported. The “enemy’s offensive attempt failed miserably,” it said. However, officials at the Russian-appointed local authority later told the outlet that a Ukrainian barrage of rockets left the Russian-occupied town of Nova Kakhovka just east of the city of Kherson without water or power. The battlefield reports could not be independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T04:59:36Z'}, {'id': '630d79858f080ba02dce9a78', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv’s forces have reportedly broken through Russian defences in several sectors of the frontline near the city of Kherson, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy has claimed. “I should note today the (Russian) defences were broken through in a few hours,” Oleksiy Arestovych said in a video interview on Youtube. A spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern command, Nataliya Humenyuk, said Ukraine’s forces had struck more than 10 sites in the past week and “unquestionably weakened the enemy” during a Monday briefing. Humenyuk declined to give details, saying Russian forces in the south remained “quite powerful” and that the operation needed “silence” as media attention could affect the results. Her claims could not be independently corroborated.\nSergiy Khlan, a local deputy and adviser to the regional governor told Ukraine’s Pryamyi TV channel on Monday: Today there was a powerful artillery attack on enemy positions in ... the entire territory of the occupied Kherson region. This is the announcement of what we have been waiting for since the spring - it is the beginning of the end of the occupation of Kherson region.” “What is happening now is a prepared, well-balanced start of a counteroffensive,” Khlan told Agence France-Presse. A seperate Ukrainian military source told CNN that its forces have taken back four villages near the city of Kherson after breaking through the frontline in three places, with the main “target” being Kherson. The operation began with heavy shelling of Russian positions and the rear, forcing them to flee, the source was quoted as saying. Ukrainian forces were also reportedly shelling the ferries in the Kherson region that Moscow is using to supply Russian-occupied territory on the west bank of the Dnieper river.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T04:47:37Z'}, {'id': '630d43df8f0876e20fe16b4f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian troops are mounting a long-awaited counteroffensive in the southern region of Kherson, military officials have said. Ukraine’s southern command spokesperson, Natalia Humeniuk, said on Monday: Today we started offensive actions in various directions, including in the Kherson region.” The military official declined to provide more details about the new offensive but said Ukraine’s recent strikes on Russia’s southern logistical routes had “unquestionably weakened the enemy”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, did not address the counteroffensive specifically during his Monday evening address but said: If they want to survive, it is time for the Russian military to flee. The occupiers should know: we will oust them to the border. To our border, the line of which has not changed.” Those who surrendered would be treated under the Geneva conventions, he said, adding: “If they do not listen to me, they will deal with our defenders, who will not stop until they liberate everything that belongs to Ukraine.” “Ukraine is returning its own. It will return the Kharkiv region, Luhansk region, Donetsk region, Zaporizhzhia region, Kherson region, Crimea … This will happen.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T04:32:50Z'}, {'id': '630d3f3b8f080ba02dce993c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I will be bringing you all the latest developments for the next short while. Whether you’ve been following our coverage overnight or you’ve just dropped in, here are the latest lines. The UN nuclear watchdog has assembled a team that is en route to visit Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant this week, International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said. “We must protect the safety and security of Ukraine’s and Europe’s biggest nuclear facility,” he added. Meanwhile, Ukrainian troops are mounting a long-awaited counteroffensive in the southern region of Kherson, military officials have said. It is 7.30am in Kyiv. Here is where we stand: Ukrainian troops are mounting a long-awaited counteroffensive in the southern region of Kherson, military officials have said. “Today we started offensive actions in various directions, including in the Kherson region,” Ukraine’s southern command spokesperson, Natalia Humeniuk, said on Monday. She declined to provide more details about the new offensive but said Ukraine’s recent strikes on Russia’s southern logistical routes had “unquestionably weakened the enemy”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, added in a Monday evening address: “If they want to survive, it is time for the Russian military to flee. The occupiers should know: we will oust them to the border. To our border, the line of which has not changed.” Kyiv’s forces have broken through Russian defences in several sectors of the frontline near the city of Kherson, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy claimed. Oleksiy Arestovych said Ukrainian forces were also shelling the ferries in the Kherson region that Moscow is using to supply Russian-occupied territory on the west bank of the Dnieper river. A seperate Ukrainian military source told CNN that its forces have taken back four villages near the city of Kherson after breaking through the frontline in three places, with the main “target” being Kherson. The operation began with heavy shelling of Russian positions and the rear, forcing them to flee, the source was quoted as saying. A Ukrainian barrage of rockets left the Russian-occupied town of Nova Kakhovka in the Kherson region without water or power, officials at the Russian-appointed local authority told Russia’s RIA news agency. The town lies just to the east of the city of Kherson. A team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog arrived in Kyiv on Monday night en route to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team will visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday. “We must protect the safety and security of Ukraine’s and Europe’s biggest nuclear facility,” Grossi tweeted. Missiles and shells are frequently hitting areas around the power station and nearby towns, prompting fears it may be too dangerous for the mission to proceed. The Kremlin said the IAEA mission was “necessary” but has ruled out vacating the site. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Ukraine expects the IAEA delegation to “state the facts” regarding the violation of all nuclear safety protocols, adding that Russia “is putting not only Ukraine but also the entire world at threat of risk of a nuclear accident”. Russian forces fired at Enerhodar, the city where the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is located, according to Ukraine’s armed forces. Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, also appeared to confirm the reports on his Telegram channel alongside a video of firefighters dousing burning cars. Russia is struggling to find more soldiers to fight in Ukraine and has expanded recruitment efforts by eliminating the upper age limit and by tapping into prisons. “Many of these new recruits have been observed as older, unfit and ill-trained,” a Pentagon official told journalists on Monday. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, decreed last week that his army would increase by about 10%, to 1.15 million servicemen, starting January next year. Ukrainian officials have warned politicians, experts and opinion leaders not to speculate about the progress of a military counteroffensive. Spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern command, Nataliya Humenyuk, said the operation in Kherson needed “silence” as media attention could affect the results. Ukraine’s presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, added it was necessary to wait for official statements from Ukraine’s Ministry of Defence and army. “I understand our wishes and dreams … But war is not ‘content’. Let’s filter information and work professionally out of respect for our defenders,” he wrote on Telegram. Russia has alleged a second Ukrainian was involved in the killing of Darya Dugina. Russia’s FSB security service accused without evidence a second Ukrainian citizen of acquiring fake documents and preparing the car bomb that killed the daughter of an ultranationalist Russian ideologue this month. Gas shortages across Europe are likely to last for several winters to come, the chief executive of Shell has said, raising the prospect of continued energy rationing as governments push to develop alternative supplies. Speaking at a press conference in Norway on Monday, Ben van Beurden said the situation could persist for several years. Western technology companies, including Ericsson and Nokia announced plans for complete exits from Russia on Monday, following Dell’s withdrawal last week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T04:21:50Z'}, {'id': '630e0ecf8f087b6858318080', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jair Bolsonaro’s murky family finances have come under renewed scrutiny after claims the Brazilian president and close relatives used cash to pay for more than 50 properties worth millions of dollars. The allegations – the result of a seven-month investigation by the Brazilian news group UOL – suggest that between 1990 and 2022, members of the Bolsonaro clan repeatedly used large sums of cash to pay for flats, houses and plots of land in cities including Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo. “Jair Bolsonaro and his closest relatives bought 107 properties over the last 30 years and at least 51 of those properties were bought with cash,” UOL claimed, citing hundreds of notarial and real estate deeds as well as interviews with sellers. One property – a “mansion” in rural São Paulo – was allegedly acquired for 2.67m reais ($525,000) by Bolsonaro’s brother-in-law, who reportedly uses the nickname “Jagunço” (hired gun). “The president needs to explain the origin of this money. Where did this money come from?” said Juliana Dal Piva, one of the reporters behind the exposé. Bolsonaro, who won power in 2018 by pledging to fight corruption, reacted tetchily to the reports, which he blamed on “a news outlet without the slightest credibility”. “What’s the problem in paying for a property in cash?” Bolsonaro reportedly asked, shrugging off the possibility of an investigation. “Investigate, my God,” he told reporters. Leonardo Sakamoto, a UOL columnist, wrote: “You don’t need to be a financial genius to understand that the use of large sums of cash to buy property is a means of laundering resources of illegal origin.” Dal Piva said one case involving Bolsonaro’s senator son, Flávio Bolsonaro, involved the cash payment of 638,000 reais for two flats in Rio’s beachside Copacabana neighbourhood.\n“That’s more than $100,000 – it is an extraordinary amount … and there are several such transactions involving 100,000, 200,000 or 500,000 [reais]. They have never explained the origin of this money and why they decided to use cash instead of making an electronic transfer or paying by check,” said Dal Piva, the author of a forthcoming book about the president’s financial dealings called Jair’s Business: The Forbidden History of the Bolsonaro Clan. The book, which will be published in September by one of Brazil’s top publishers, promises to lift the lid on an allegedly long-running corruption scheme involving Bolsonaro and his politician sons. The Bolsonaro family has for years been dogged by allegations of involvement in an illegal racket known as “rachadinha”, involving the embezzlement of the wages of employees. They have rejected those claims. This week’s revelations come with Bolsonaro facing an uphill struggle to secure a second four-year term when Brazil chooses its next president on 2 October. The far-right former army captain is trailing badly in the polls behind his leftist rival, the ex-president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. In the first presidential debate, on Sunday Bolsonaro accused Lula of leading “the most corrupt government in Brazilian history”. But on Tuesday it was Bolsonaro facing uncomfortable questions. Dal Piva said she was not surprised the president had declined to explain the use of so much cash. “He’s afraid of this story,” she said. “That is why he doesn’t respond.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T17:54:26Z'}]}