{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A disturbing wave’: midges threaten tourist trade in Italian town', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-09T16:31:21Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/09/a-disturbing-wave-midges-threaten-tourist-trade-in-italian-town', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Angela Giuffrida', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/angela-giuffrida'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Top stories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/topstories'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '62f2f4d28f084d500ca22725', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand’s Labour government has repealed the controversial “three strikes” law under which a mentally ill man was sentenced to seven years in prison for trying to kiss a stranger in the street. The law, introduced by the previous National-led government, forced judges to automatically give a maximum sentence to any criminals who had committed three serious sex, violent or drug crimes over their lifetime – regardless of the timeframe of offending, discretion of the judge, or other mitigating factors. Labour had promised to repeal the law, which it said was “ineffective” and responsible for “absurd outcomes”. The justice minister, Kiritapu Allan, said on its repeal that the three-strikes law was “a kneejerk reaction to crime” that resulted in disproportionate and excessive sentences. “There was no evidence that it worked. It failed to be a deterrent to offenders, it failed the taxpayer, and it failed victims, because it ensured they were in the system for longer,” she said. Allan noted that judges still retained the power to issue lengthy sentences and could impose the same restrictions as provided by the three-strikes law “in appropriate cases”.\nIn one of the most high-profile New Zealand cases, Daniel Clinton Fitzgerald was sentenced to seven years in jail, after being convicted in 2018 of trying to kiss a woman on a Wellington street without her permission. At the time, the judge indicated that the circumstances of Fitzgerald’s offending would not usually result in prison time, but his hands were tied by the law. The supreme court overturned the sentence in 2021, citing Fitzgerald’s “significant mental health issues” including schizophrenia. In a briefing, the corrections department, police and justice ministry said there was no local or international evidence that three-strikes laws deterred reoffending. “Based on the data alone, there is no distinct indication that the three-strikes legislation is deterring individuals from committing qualifying offences,” it said. Under the repeal, judges will still be able to impose maximum sentences, but they will not be automatic. National and Act, the parties that created the law when last in government, opposed the repeal, and said they would reinstate it if elected. “Three strikes meant that the worst repeat offenders spent longer in prison, creating fewer victims and keeping our communities safer,” said the National justice spokesperson, Paul Goldsmith. The Green party said the repeal did not go far enough and people sentenced under the law should have their sentence reconsidered by a judge. “Anyone who has experienced the harmful effects of this law should have the chance to have their sentence reviewed,” said the Green justice spokesperson, Golriz Ghahraman. Overseas, three strikes laws have been subject to similar controversies. In California in 2010, a man was sentenced to up to eight years in prison for stealing a $3.99 bag of shredded cheese. He avoided a life sentence only because the court deemed him bipolar and unable to control his impulses to steal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-10T02:21:22Z'}, {'id': '62f2dd718f080b1fc4105469', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand’s opposition party has stood down MP Sam Uffindell and launched an investigation after backing him for two days, following fresh allegations of bullying behaviour during his university years, which he denies. The move comes after a woman who lived with Uffindell and three other University of Otago flatmates in 2003 alleged in an interview with broadcaster RNZ released on Tuesday that Uffindell was an aggressive “verbal bully” who could become physically intimidating, and would trash the house after “excessive” alcohol and drug use. “He was smashing on my door and yelling obscenities and basically telling me to get out – ‘hit the road, fatty’,” the woman, who has kept her identity private, said. “I ended up climbing out of my bedroom window and ran to a friend’s house to stay the night. I feared for my safety. I was scared.” National party leader Chris Luxon said in a statement: “This evening my office became aware of very concerning accusations made to RNZ about behaviour shown by Mr Uffindell toward a female flatmate in 2003 while at university. “Mr Uffindell disputes the allegations and in the interests of natural justice, an independent investigation will now be undertaken to determine the facts. While this process is underway, Mr Uffindell will be stood down from caucus. The investigation, led by a QC, is expected to take two weeks, and its terms of reference have yet to be confirmed. Uffindell denied the allegations, saying in a statement that “flatmates fell out” and the incident “simply did not happen”. “When I was a student at Otago I enjoyed a student lifestyle, which included drinking and, at times, smoking marijuana. While in second year a number of flatmates fell out – and two of the flatmates left midway through the year,” he said. “I reject any accusation that I engaged in behaviour that was intimidatory or bullying. This simply did not happen.” Uffindell is the National party’s newest MP, winning a June by-election for the safe seat of Tauranga. The new allegations come on the back of reporting by news outlet Stuff on Monday which alleged that in 1999, Uffindell – then 16 – beat up a 13-year-old as part of a group attack at the prestigious Auckland’s Kings College that left the victim bruised and experiencing significant trauma. He was asked to leave the school following the attack. After 22 years, Uffindell apologised to his victim last year after a stint overseas, telling Stuff his remorse was unlinked to his political ambitions. The victim told Stuff he accepted the apology at the time but was rocked to see Uffindell stand for politics months later. On Tuesday morning, Uffindell told media that he had apologised to other people for his behaviour at school. “I’m not proud at all,” he said. “I was effectively a bully. I was a mean person. There will be other people at high school that I have hurt.” He informed party bosses of the 1999 incident in the lead-up to the preselection but it was not made public. The saga is a significant problem for Luxon and his party, which has been beleaguered by a questionable track record of candidate selection. On Tuesday, Luxon said Uffindell was “a good candidate and is a high integrity person and he’s got good character”. On Wednesday, his tone had changed. Speaking to RNZ, Luxon called the new allegations “very concerning and very serious” but defended his earlier assessment. “The determination was look, a 38-year-old man is different from a 16-year-old bully. He genuinely felt … he had reformed and changed,” he said. Luxon noted that Uffindell had previously declared the King’s College bullying incident “but that doesn’t preclude the fact that we are a party of law and order”. Uffindell also faces accusations of hypocrisy. He campaigned on law and order issues, saying in his maiden speech that Tauranga was battling a “growing culture of lawlessness, lack of accountability, a sense of impunity, and significant underlying generational social problems”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-10T01:20:18Z'}, {'id': '62f1e9328f08b2ca242c7cd4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s military drills targeting Taiwan have set a new normal, and are likely to “regularise” similar armed exercises off the coast or even more aggressive action much closer to the island, analysts have said. China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has been conducting live-fire exercises and other drills in the seas around Taiwan’s main island for almost a week, in a purported response to the controversial visit to Taipei by the US House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. Beijing claims Taiwan as a province. It has not ruled out taking it by force and objects to any and all foreign shows of support for its sovereignty. Taiwan has accused Beijing of using Pelosi’s visit as an excuse to prepare for an invasion. While some drills are continuing, the big show put on last week has ended, and observers are now trying to assess how the dynamics of the region have changed, and what the future holds for cross-strait relations. “This is about striking fear and a sense of inevitability in Taiwanese hearts and minds,” said Alessio Patalano, professor of war and strategy in east Asia at King’s College London. “There is, in the political messaging delivered through military means, a real risk that these more overtly aggressive steps might be normalised.”\nWhether Beijing felt it achieved anything with its drills was unclear, some analysts said. A US Pentagon official said this week there was no change to their assessment that China would not try to retake Taiwan militarily in the next two years. According to a Guardian analysis of public data from Taiwan, China and Japan, the PLA sent at least 140 planes into Taiwan’s air defence zone during the week, including 100 over the median line, an unofficial maritime line that crosses the middle of the Taiwan strait. The planes included fighter jets, reconnaissance planes, H-6 bombers and a refuelling aircraft. The PLA navy claims it came within Taiwan’s territorial waters, which Taiwan disputes. At least 41 Chinese ships also crossed the median line. Ten PLA navy ships played “cat and mouse” around the line with 10 Taiwan ships on Sunday, according to Taipei. At least seven “batches” of one or more drones were detected over Taiwan’s outlying islands, Kinmen and Matsu, with Taiwan’s defence ministry saying flares were fired in response. Aerial drones were also seen near Japan. “It’s impossible to do an accurate assessment of how well the PLA performed in conducting joint operations,” said Bonnie Glaser, a China expert at the German Marshall Fund. “It’s not clear who was doing command and control … They rehearsed imposing a blockade and carrying out strikes on the island, but the exercises didn’t contain all the elements that would be needed to invade the island,” she said. Glaser added that the newly announced drills focusing on antisubmarine and sea assault operations would practise some of those capabilities missing from last week.\nFor now, most of the focus for observers is on the median line crossings, which until last week were a rare event. After largely respecting the line for decades, Beijing has changed its stance, denied its existence, sent its planes and ships over it at times of heightened tensions, and claimed wholesale sovereignty over the entire strait. On Tuesday, Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, said there was concern the PLA would “routinise” such crossings. He urged the international community to push back, saying Beijing clearly aimed to control the strait. A future full of median line crossings may not be at the same scale seen last week, but “the key is to regularise it”, says Crisis Group’s senior China analyst, Amanda Hsiao. “This is an ongoing attempt to basically say the median line is no longer a thing.” John Culver, a retired CIA analyst and former east Asia intelligence officer, said it was also important to note what the PLA had not done during its drills. This included crossing into Taiwan’s territorial or contiguous seas, flying warplanes over the island, or mobilising coastguard or marine militias, “which would be key for an actual blockade”. “This could be viewed as restraint on China’s part, but also are escalation steps they’ve reserved to show even greater threat/seriousness next time,” Culver said on Twitter.\nBeijing’s “notices of avoidance” for the drill – which asks commercial ships to avoid the area – expired on Sunday but the PLA did not announce a formal end, instead announcing new exercises concentrating on antisubmarine and sea assault operations. It did not say where. The drills fed a growing nationalism in China, particularly online, as well as anti-US and anti-Japan sentiment. Dr Ying-yu Lin, of Tamkang University’s graduate institute of international affairs and strategic studies, says it would not have mattered if Pelosi arrived or not – he expected a “big show” before the Chinese Communist party congress later this year, when China’s president, Xi Jinping, will seek his third term. “[Xi] wants to show his power, to let Taiwan and America know that the PRC is not like 25 years ago … and the PLA is rising,” Lin says. “He also wants to show his power to mainland people.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:36:04Z'}, {'id': '62f2de508f080b1fc410546f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'James Marape has been returned as Papua New Guinea’s prime minister for its 11th parliament after a fraught and violent election period that has run for roughly six weeks. Marape – who became prime minister in 2019 after toppling his predecessor and former party leader, Peter O’Neill – was invited to form government by the governor general, after his Pangu Pati secured 36 seats and was able to strike deals with coalition partners to bring its numbers to more than 80. O’Neill had hoped to reclaim the top job, but was left disappointed after only 14 members were declared for his rival People’s National Congress (PNC) party.\nThe new parliament sat for the first time on Tuesday, despite the counting of votes continuing in 11 seats, and Marape was voted in as prime minister – 97 votes for and none against. O’Neill left the chamber before voting took place. Speaking on Tuesday, Marape reassured Papua New Guinea that his party was “not for one region, not for one family, not for one person” but “belongs to this country”. “Today, I want to give comfort to every Papua New Guinean wherever you are, as shown and reflected on the floor of parliament where 100% of members showed up to vote not just for me but for the mandate, collectively the coalition secured because we went to the elections as partners,” he said. Australian prime minister Anthony Albanese issued his congratulations, tweeting: “Congratulations James Marape on your re-election as Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea. The Australia-PNG partnership is special: we are neighbours, friends and family. Australia is committed to working with the PNG government to continue to deepen our comprehensive bilateral relationship and tackle shared regional challenges.” O’Neill said he had left the chamber in protest at the fact that parliament had sat and decided on a prime minister while counting was still under way in some seats. “I did not vote for Marape simply because I cannot support a leader not properly elected by the people in their electorates,” O’Neill said. “I cannot vote for what is wrong. I walked out and gave our party MPs the opportunity to vote on conscience.” O’Neill had filed an urgent application seeking orders to prevent the parliament from sitting this week, arguing that for parliament to be called there has to be a declaration of all 118 seats. The supreme court refused to issue the orders, ruling there was no urgency in the application. The election was plagued with violence, with 50 election-related deaths reported by the end of July. There were also reports of voter fraud, ballot boxes being destroyed and candidates taking over polling stations. Up to a million people were believed to have been disfranchised due to the electoral roll not being updated in a decade. The new PNG parliament has female representation for the first time since 2017. Two women have been elected – central governor Rufina Peter and Rai Coast MP Kessy Sawang. They are only the eighth and ninth female MPs ever elected to parliament in PNG’s nearly 50-year history.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T23:56:30Z'}, {'id': '62f2708e8f084d500ca22337', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian airbase deep behind the frontline in Crimea has been damaged by several large explosions, killing at least one person, although it was not immediately clear whether it had been targeted by a long-range Ukrainian missile strike. Multiple social media videos showed explosions and clouds emerging from the Saky military base in Novofedorivka on the western coast of Crimea on Tuesday afternoon, prompting questions about how a location more than 100 miles (160km) from the frontline could have been attacked. Later a senior Ukrainian official appeared to claim responsibility, without giving details. Russia’s defence ministry told the RIA Novosti news agency that the explosions took place at about 3.20pm local time, and that “several aviation munitions detonated” in a storage area. It said it was trying to discern the cause of the incident. Russian tourists holidaying on beaches nearby could be seen leaving in fear. It is one of few occasions that the peninsula, occupied by Russia since 2014, has been directly affected by the latest fighting. Local people told one Russian news site that explosions went on for an hour.\nSergey Aksyonov, the Russian-appointed head of occupied Crimea, said one person had died. Earlier, he had filmed a video statement near the site, with smoke rising in the distance, saying that ambulance crews and medics were on the scene. In his nightly address, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, did not discuss who was behind the attacks but vowed to “liberate” Crimea , saying “This Russian war against Ukraine and against the entire free Europe began with Crimea and must end with Crimea - with its liberation. “Russia has turned our peninsula, which has always been and will be one of the best places in Europe, into one of the most dangerous places in Europe. But we will return to the Ukrainian Crimea. From the Kharkiv region to Kherson, from Donetsk to Enerhodar, from Stanytsia Luhanska to Yalta, from Berdyansk to Novofedorivka – these are all parts of our country, this is Ukraine, which will be completely free. One adviser to the president, Mikhail Podolyak, said Ukraine was not taking responsibility for the explosions, suggesting partisans might have been involved. Asked by the Dozhd online television channel whether Kyiv was taking responsibility, replied: “Of course not. What do we have to do with this?” Earlier, he appeared to suggest the strike could herald a new phase of the conflict. Podolyak said that Kyiv’s long-term goal was “demilitarisation of the Russian Federation”. He added: “The future of the Crimea is to be a pearl of the Black Sea, a national park with unique nature and a world resort. Not a military base for terrorists. It is just the beginning.” Ukraine’s defence ministry said it could not determine the cause of the explosions but added, sardonically, that people should have regard for the rules of fire safety and “the prohibition of smoking in unspecified places”. The airbase, where Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill landed en route to the Yalta conference in February 1945, is too far – about 110 miles – from the frontline to be struck by conventional land-based Ukrainian rockets. It could, however, be in range of other longer-range systems. In the previous 24 hours there had been growing speculation about Ukraine’s missile capability after the US confirmed, for the first time, that it had supplied Kyiv with long-range anti-radiation missiles, used to knock out air defence systems. A Pentagon spokesperson said on Monday that the US had previously supplied a number of the weapons to Ukraine, but declined to say how many or of what type. The weapons are widely believed to be the AGM-88 high-speed anti-radiation (Harm) missile, a tail fin of which was being circulated by Russian bloggers on Sunday. They are typically launched from a plane and have a maximum range of about 90 miles. Over the last month, Ukraine has shown it is able to strike deeper and deeper into Russian-held territory using the Himars rocket artillery, which has a range of about 50 miles. However, there were other suggestions that the Saky base was hit by a guerrilla operation. Margarita Simonyan, the editor-in-chief of the state-owned Russia Today outlet, appeared to suggest in a tweet that the explosions were caused by sabotage – although she later said the explosion was caused by “several munitions” detonating in storage. In her later posts, Simonyan said there had been no missile strikes and added that claims Kyiv’s forces could strike 300km (186 miles) were “Ukropropaganda”. She advised people to “exhale and go to the beach”. Other videos, however, showed traffic jams forming as people sought to flee Crimea. The Saky airbase is about 165 miles from the Ukrainian city of Odesa, prompting speculation it could have been targeted by Neptune missiles previously used to knock out the Russian Moskva warship. The anti-ship missiles have a range of about 190 miles and can be used to hit ground targets. A Ukrainian official, speaking anonymously, told the New York Times that “a device exclusively of Ukrainian manufacture was used” in the attack. That could suggest it was a Neptune, a cruise missile developed by Ukraine and which first became operationally available in the early phases of the war.\nEarlier on Tuesday, officials said at least three Ukrainian civilians were killed and 23 were wounded by Russian shelling in 24 hours, including in an attack not far from the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. The governor of Dnipropetrovsk region, Valentyn Reznichenko, said that Russian forces firing more than 120 rockets at the town of Nikopol, across the Dnieper River from the plant, damaged several apartment buildings and industrial sites. The prime ministers of Estonia and Finland have called on fellow European countries to stop issuing tourist visas to Russian citizens, saying they should not be able to take holidays in Europe while the Russian government carries out a war in Ukraine. Kaja Kallas, the Estonian prime minister, said on Tuesday that “visiting Europe is a privilege, not a human right” and that it was “time to end tourism from Russia now”, a day after a similar appeal from her counterpart in Finland, Sanna Marin. Zelenskiy went further in a Washington Post interview on Monday and called for a full travel ban and the expulsion of Russians who had moved to the west. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said the idea amounted to “irrational thinking”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-10T16:18:03Z'}, {'id': '62f29c498f080b1fc410530a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is 9pm. Here is a summary of the day’s top news stories: The head of Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov, said one person had died as a result of the explosion earlier on Tuesday. Blasts rocked a Russian airbase near seaside resorts in the annexed Crimean peninsula, injuring five people according to local authorities. Witnesses told Reuters they heard at least 12 explosions at about 3.20pm local time from the Saky airbase near Novofedorivka on Crimea’s western coast. They described a final blast around 30 minutes later as the loudest. The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power firm warned of the “very high” risks from shelling at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in the Russian-occupied south and said it was vital Kyiv regains control over the facility in time for winter. Energoatom’s chief, Petro Kotin, told Reuters in an interview that last week’s Russian shelling had damaged three lines that connect the Zaporizhzhia plant to the Ukrainian grid and that Russia wanted to connect the facility to its grid. The leaders of Estonia and Finland want fellow European countries to stop issuing tourist visas to Russian citizens, saying they should not be able to take holidays in Europe while the Russian government carries out a war in Ukraine. The Estonian prime minister, Kaja Kallas, wrote on Tuesday on Twitter that “visiting Europe is a privilege, not a human right” and that it was “time to end tourism from Russia now”, the Associated Press reported. Russia’s Baltic exclave of Kaliningrad has been struggling with quotas imposed by the EU for sanctioned goods that it can import across Lithuania from mainland Russia or Belarus, the region’s governor admitted. Lithuania infuriated Moscow in June by banning the land transit of goods such as concrete and steel to Kaliningrad after EU sanctions on them came into force, Reuters reported. Russia has launched an Iranian satellite from Kazakhstan amid concerns that it could be used for battlefield surveillance in Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Iran has denied that the Khayyam satellite, which was delivered into orbit aboard a Soyuz rocket launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, would ever be under Russian control. Russia has suspended an arrangement that allowed US and Russian inspectors to visit each other’s nuclear weapons sites under the 2010 New Start treaty, in a fresh blow to arms control. Mutual inspections had been suspended as a health precaution since the start of the Covid pandemic, but a foreign ministry statement on Monday added another reason Russia is unwilling to restart them. It argued that US sanctions imposed because of the invasion of Ukraine stopped Russian inspectors travelling to the US. The global health aid agency Unitaid is donating 220 specialised portable breathing devices to Ukraine that can help save lives of premature babies even in frontline hospitals where there is no electrical power. During Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, hundreds of hospitals have been damaged or destroyed, disrupting supply lines and placing newborn babies at risk of death or disability from a lack of access to equipment and oxygen, Reuters reported. More than 10.5 million people have crossed the border from Ukraine since Russia’s invasion, the UN refugee agency UNHCR said on its website on Tuesday. Ukrainians have been fleeing their homes since the Russian invasion began on 24 February. In an interview, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR), Denis Pushilin, said the advance of pro-Russian forces in the Donbas was developing in a northern direction, with fighting on the outskirts of Bakhmut and Soledar. He said that the DPR was in negotiations with Pyongyang to bring builders from North Korea in to help rebuild the occupied territory. Pushilin also stated that there would be an “open tribunal over the war criminals of Ukraine”, with the first to be held in Mariupol, which would feature the testimony of the “Azovites”, in reference to Ukraine’s Azov battalion. Russia’s assault towards the town of Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine has been its most successful axis in the Donbas region in the past month, the UK Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence update. Despite this, it had only gained 10km in that time, while elsewhere in Donbas it had gained only 3km over 30 days – “almost certainly significantly less than planned”. That’s it for the Ukraine live blog for today. Thanks for following along. I’ll be back tomorrow, see you then.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T18:46:59Z'}, {'id': '62f29b048f080b1fc41052df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian airbase deep behind the frontline in Crimea was damaged by several large explosions on Tuesday afternoon, killing at least one person, although it was not immediately clear whether it had been targeted by a long range Ukrainian missile strike. Multiple social media videos showed explosions and clouds emerging from the Saky military base in Novofedorivka on the western coast of Crimea, prompting questions about how a location more than 100 miles from the frontline could have been attacked. Later a senior Ukrainian official appeared to claim responsibility, without giving details. Russia’s defence ministry told the RIA Novosti news agency that the explosions took place at about 3.20pm local time, and that “several aviation munitions detonated” in a storage area. It said it was trying to discern the cause of the incident.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T17:41:51Z'}, {'id': '62f295f48f084d500ca224fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power firm warned of the “very high” risks of shelling at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in the Russian-occupied south and said it was vital Kyiv regains control over the facility in time for winter. Energoatom’s chief, Petro Kotin, told Reuters in an interview that last week’s Russian shelling had damaged three lines that connect the Zaporizhzhia plant to the Ukrainian grid and that Russia wanted to connect the facility to its grid. Ukraine and Russia have accused each other of shelling the site of the vast nuclear power station – Europe’s biggest – that lies in Russian-controlled territory, in recent days. Some of the shelling landed near storage facilities for spent fuel, an area that has 174 containers of highly radioactive material, Kotin said, warning of the dangers of them being hit. “This is … the most radioactive material in all the nuclear power plant. This would [mean] the distribution [of it] around this place and then we will have like a radiation cloud and then the weather will decide … which direction the cloud goes,” he said. “The risk is very high,” he said. Kotin said Russia wanted to connect the plant to its grid, a technically difficult process that requires the facility to be severed from the Ukrainian system before it can be gradually connected to the Russian one.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T17:30:12Z'}, {'id': '62f28a368f082f7526a86716', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The leaders of Estonia and Finland want fellow European countries to stop issuing tourist visas to Russian citizens, saying they should not be able to take holidays in Europe while the Russian government carries out a war in Ukraine. Estonian prime minister, Kaja Kallas, wrote on Tuesday on Twitter that “visiting Europe is a privilege, not a human right” and that it is “time to end tourism from Russia now”, the Associated Press reported. A day earlier, her counterpart in Finland, Sanna Marin, told Finnish broadcaster YLE that “it is not right that while Russia is waging an aggressive, brutal war of aggression in Europe, Russians can live a normal life, travel in Europe, be tourists”. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, went further in a Washington Post interview on Monday, saying all western countries should ban Russian tourists. Estonia and Finland both border Russia and are members of the European Union, which banned air travel from Russia after it invaded Ukraine. But Russians can still travel by land to both countries and apparently are then taking flights to other European destinations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T16:52:33Z'}, {'id': '62f280268f080b1fc41051e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian military claims to have struck a major airbase deep inside the occupied Crimean peninsula. At least 12 explosions hit the Saky naval airbase, causing a huge plume of smoke. Russia has disputed the claims and says it was not an attack but a detonation of ammunition.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:41:47Z'}, {'id': '62f27cb58f080b1fc41051aa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov, said one person has died as a result of the explosion earlier on Tuesday. Blasts rocked a Russian airbase near seaside resorts in the annexed Crimean peninsula, injuring five people according to local authorities. Witnesses told Reuters they heard at least 12 explosions at about 3.20pm local time from the Saky airbase near Novofedorivka on Crimea’s western coast. They described a final blast around 30 minutes later as the loudest. Russia’s defence ministry claimed the “detonation of several aviation ammunition stores” had caused an explosion, Russian news agencies reported, but that there had been no injuries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:44:17Z'}, {'id': '62f278698f082f7526a8664a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has launched an Iranian satellite from Kazakhstan amid concerns that it could be used for battlefield surveillance in Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Iran has denied that the Khayyam satellite, which was delivered into orbit aboard a Soyuz rocket launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, would ever be under Russian control. But the Washington Post had previously reported that Moscow told Tehran it “plans to use the satellite for several months, or longer, to enhance its surveillance of military targets” in Ukraine, according to two US officials. The satellite, named after the Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam, was built by Russia and will include a high-resolution camera that would give Tehran new capabilities to monitor sensitive facilities in Israel and the Persian Gulf, the paper reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:09:21Z'}, {'id': '62f2723c8f080b1fc410512e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Crimea’s emergency services said three people were injured as a result of the blast. The ministry of defence said earlier there were no casualties and no aircraft was damaged. The head of occupied Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov, said it was “too early” to talk about casualties, adding that medics were working on the ground. He said: Ambulance crews and medics are working on the spot, there are enough of them. It is too early to talk about casualties. Among the civilian population, no one has yet applied for medical assistance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:03:31Z'}, {'id': '62f26cce8f084d500ca222e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine appears to have struck a major Russian airbase deep inside the occupied Crimean peninsula in what is being seen as a significant strike in a region regarded by Moscow as largely safe from attack. Video footage posted on Tuesday afternoon showed a series of large explosions at the Saky air force base located 200km behind the Russian front lines in Ukraine’s south. The Saky naval air station is located in Novofedorivka, and is the airbase associated with operations of Russian Black Sea fleet. What is significant about the attack is the distance of the location targeted behind Russian lines, suggesting both the use of ballistic missiles and that recent Ukrainian strikes on Russian air defences allowed the missiles to hit their target.\nUnderlining the importance of the attack, Phillips O’Brien, professor of strategic studies at St Andrews University, tweeted: “What the Ukrainians are doing is extremely important. By showing they can hit Crimea, they will further stretch Russia defensive capabilities. The Russians are going to have to protect a huge area behind the front lines.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:04:34Z'}, {'id': '62f263dc8f084d500ca22265', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is carrying a little more details from the witness it has spoken to concerning the reports of explosions in Crimea. At least 12 explosions of varying intensity were heard in the course of a minute around 3.30pm local time, two witnesses said. Three were particularly loud, triggering sparks and smoke. (It is worth noting that the social media posts shared by Rodion Miroshnik placed the explosions slightly earlier, at 3pm local time – see post from 22 minutes ago) Around 30 minutes later, one more blast, described by witnesses as the loudest of all, triggered two more plumes of smoke and dust. In the nearby town of Saky, sirens blared. Reuters has distributed this image of the scene, which was taken from a third party.\nThe Russian governor of Crimea, Sergei Aksyonov, said in a post on his Telegram channel that he had gone to the area and that the “circumstances are being clarified”. An adviser to Aksyonov confirmed that explosions had occurred but declined to comment on the possible cause, Russian news agencies reported. Emergency services were deployed, the Tass news agency reported, citing the regional health ministry. Russia for decades leased the naval port of Sevastopol, home of its Black Sea Fleet, from Kyiv, but in 2014 annexed the entire peninsula from Ukraine in a move not recognised by most other countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:05:20Z'}, {'id': '62f262a88f082f7526a86551', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Telegram, the Russian Tass news agency has posted that “the Association of Tour Operators of Russia said that the explosion in the Crimea occurred far from the resort area. There were no casualties or injuries among the tourists.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:05:29Z'}, {'id': '62f260f98f082f7526a8653c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities in Crimea appear to have been confirming reports of explosions in the region, although details are still scant. Oleg Kryuchkov, a Kremlin-appointed adviser to the authorities in Crimea, has posted to Telegram to say: “So far, I can only confirm the very fact of several explosions in the Novofedorivka area. I ask everyone to wait for official reports.” The BBC reports that pro-Russian military commander Yuri Kotenok said on his Telegram channel that there were about 10 explosions. “20km from Novofedorivka windows tremble and alarms go off in cars,” he wrote. It quotes another local authority figure as saying: “Our airfield is exploding. Explosions are at the airfield. All the windows here have been shattered.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T15:06:08Z'}, {'id': '62f25e688f084d500ca2223b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The video clips which purport to show explosions in Crimea are being shared by pro-Russian social media as well as Ukrainian social media Rodion Miroshnik, who goes under the title of the ambassador to Russia for the self-proclaimed and chiefly unrecognised Luhansk People’s Republic, has forwarded a message on Telegram featuring two videos and a still image of the apparent explosions, accompanied by the message: Residents of Crimea report explosions near the village of Novofedorivka. The first explosion occurred at about 15:00 local time. There were a few more after it. Whether there are victims is unknown.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T13:21:22Z'}, {'id': '62f259698f08bd21778f97c4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three local witnesses have told Reuters they heard several loud explosions and seen black smoke rising from the direction of a Russian military airbase at Novofedorivka in western Crimea on Tuesday. Videos shared on social media also showed a plume of smoke in the area. Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine in 2014. More details soon …', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T13:17:19Z'}, {'id': '62f24f768f08fe838b4a402d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Global health aid agency Unitaid is donating 220 specialised portable breathing devices to Ukraine that can help save lives of premature babies even in frontline hospitals where there is no electrical power. During Russia’s invasion of Ukraine hundreds of hospitals have been damaged or destroyed, disrupting supply lines and placing newborn babies at risk of death or disability from a lack of access to equipment and oxygen, Reuters reported. Herve Verhoosel, a spokesperson for Unitaid, told a media briefing that the war was causing extra stress on pregnant women, leading to an increase in the number of premature births, which had tripled in some areas. The new bubble nasal continuous positive airway pressure (bCPAP) devices are available in 25 facilities across Ukraine, Verhoosel said. Unitaid funds medical innovation programmes mainly in poor countries, and is hosted by the World Health Organization. WHO spokesperson Margaret Harris said that on a recent visit to a paediatric hospital close to the frontline in Ukraine she had seen medical staff who sleep in the basement every night, and constantly have to move children on ventilation machines. “So having very portable devices that can function offline is absolutely critical,” she told the briefing. Unitaid partnered with Vayu Global Health, a non-profit that specialises in low-cost healthcare equipment for developing countries, to provide the Kenya-made bCPAP machines, which cost about $500 each, as well as 125 oxygen blender systems.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T12:18:46Z'}, {'id': '62f245798f08fe838b4a3fac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s Baltic exclave of Kaliningrad has been struggling with quotas imposed by the European Union for sanctioned goods that it can import across Lithuania from mainland Russia or Belarus, the region’s governor admitted. Lithuania infuriated Moscow in June by banning the land transit of goods such as concrete and steel to Kaliningrad after EU sanctions on them came into force, Reuters reported. As part of a deal reached in July, the EU imposed limits on the volume of such goods crossing by land between Kaliningrad and mainland Russia or Belarus, based on average volumes over the last three years, to prevent Kaliningrad being used to dodge sanctions. Kaliningrad governor Anton Alikhanov estimated that the limits permit Russia to ship around 500,000 tonnes of sanctioned goods in total in both directions each year. But he said some quotas had already been reached, making it impossible, for instance, for Kaliningrad to import cement from Belarus – which used to account for around 200,000 tonnes a year. Moscow says trade with its outlying territory should not be subject to limits. “Today, we have already exhausted the limits set by Europeans for the transportation of goods by rail: for instance, certain kinds of iron, steel, oil products, fertilisers, antifreeze and timber,” Russian news agencies quoted Alikhanov as saying at a meeting of the Valdai discussion club on Tuesday. Russia’s former ambassador to Lithuania said that, while the transit deal had helped avoid the “worst case scenario”, the situation was “far from normal”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T12:19:30Z'}, {'id': '62f23fee8f08bd21778f9682', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 10.5 million people have crossed the border from Ukraine since Russia’s invasion, the United Nations refugee agency UNHCR said on its website on Tuesday. Ukrainians have been fleeing their homes since the Russian invasion began on 24 February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T12:38:42Z'}, {'id': '62f235928f086b906d74e590', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence ministry said on Tuesday that Russian forces had destroyed an ammunition depot near Uman in Ukraine storing US-made Himars missiles and M777 howitzers, the RIA Novosti news agency reported. The Reuters news agency was unable to verify the battlefield reports. In its daily briefing, the ministry said it had destroyed more than 300 rockets in the strike. Kyiv has hailed the arrival of the advanced, long-range Himars from the United States as a possible game-changer, while Moscow has accused the West of “dragging out” the conflict by arming Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:40:52Z'}, {'id': '62f22ed18f08fe838b4a3eaf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has suspended an arrangement that allowed US and Russian inspectors to visit each other’s nuclear weapons sites under the 2010 New Start treaty, in a fresh blow to arms control. Mutual inspections had been suspended as a health precaution since the start of the Covid pandemic, but a foreign ministry statement on Monday added another reason Russia is unwilling to restart them. It argued that US sanctions imposed because of the invasion of Ukraine stopped Russian inspectors travelling to the US. Ukraine has reported intense Russian shelling across the frontlines on Tuesday as both sides traded blame for the weekend strike on the Zaporizhzhia nuclear complex that triggered international concern about a potential atomic disaster. Heavy fighting was reported in frontline towns near the eastern city of Donetsk, where Ukrainian officials said Russian troops were launching waves of attacks. In an interview, the self-appointed leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, Denis Pushilin, said the advance of pro-Russian forces in the Donbas is developing in a northern direction, with fighting going on on the outskirts of Bakhmut and Soledar. He said that the DPR was in negotiations with Pyongyang to bring builders from North Korea in to help rebuild the occupied territory. Pushilin also stated that there would be an “open tribunal over the war criminals of Ukraine”, with the first to be held in Mariupol, which would feature the testimony of the “Azovites”, in reference to Ukraine’s Azov battalion. Russia’s assault towards the town of Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine has been its most successful axis in the Donbas region in the past month, the UK Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence update. Despite this, it had gained only 10km in that time, while elsewhere in Donbas it had gained only 3km over 30 days – “almost certainly significantly less than planned”. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the Russian-imposed military-civilian administration in the occupied Kherson region of Ukraine, has said: “Kherson region is ready to repel the attempts of the offensive by Ukrainian militants, if such a criminal order is given. Reliable protection of the borders of the region is provided by the Russian ministry of defence.” Two further grain-carrying ships have sailed from Ukraine’s Chornomorsk port on Tuesday, as part of the deal to unblock Ukrainian sea exports. The Ocean Lion, which departed for South Korea, is carrying 64,720 tonnes of corn, it said, while the Rahmi Yağcı is carrying 5,300 tonnes of sunflower meal to Istanbul. Four ships that left Ukraine earlier are anchored near Istanbul and will be inspected on Tuesday, the Turkish defence ministry said. Belarus, where Russian troops were positioned to hold joint exercises before they invaded Ukraine from the north in February, has announced it is to hold live fire military training exercises both in Belarus and in Russia during August. Russia launched an Iranian satellite into orbit on Tuesday on morning, but Tehran has sought to deflect suspicions that Moscow could use Khayyam to improve its surveillance of military targets in Ukraine. The US believes Russia has suffered between 70,000 and 80,000 casualties, either killed or wounded, since its latest invasion of Ukraine began on 24 February. Colin Kahl, the Pentagon’s top policy official, said: “The Russians are taking a tremendous number of casualties on the other side of the equation. I think it’s safe to suggest that the Russians are probably taking 70-80,000 casualties in less than six months.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:24:00Z'}, {'id': '62f22e208f086b906d74e53f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has again accused the Russian Federation of terrorism. He posted to Telegram a selection of images showing damage to buildings and wheat fields in Ukraine with the message: The only difference between terrorists and Russia is that the first ones take responsibility for what they have done, while Russia does not have the courage to do so and has the audacity to blame others for its crimes – individual countries and the whole world. And now this world faces a choice. Determination, and therefore – an end to the crimes and atrocities of Russia, or another explosion of another bomb from these terrorists.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T12:39:28Z'}, {'id': '62f22a698f08bd21778f9589', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Telegram channel of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) is carrying a summary of an interview conducted with self-appointed leader Denis Pushilin. In it, he claims that the advance of pro-Russian forces in the Donbas is developing in a northern direction, with fighting going on on the outskirts of Bakhmut and Soledar. In Pisky, he said, “the cleanup is being completed”. Pushilin repeated the allegation that the deaths of Ukrainian prisoners of war at a Russian-controlled prison in Olenivka were caused by Ukrainian forces, saying: “Its implementation was controlled from the decision-making centres in Ukraine”. Ukraine has claimed the opposite, with satellite images suggesting that the building was destroyed not by a Himars strike from outside but either by a precision strike or by a detonation inside. He said the DPR was in negotiations with Pyongyang to bring in builders from North Korea to help rebuild the occupied territory. Pushilin also stated that there would be an “open tribunal over the war criminals of Ukraine”, with the first to be held in Mariupol, which would feature the testimony of the “Azovites”, in reference to Ukraine’s Azov battalion. The comments were made during a 20-minute section of Vladimir Solovyov’s live show. Only Russia, Syria and North Korea recognise the DPR as a legitimate authority, or Pushilin as a legitimate leader.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:25:32Z'}, {'id': '62f227d48f0869f52503231a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Belarus, where Russian troops were positioned to hold joint exercises before they invaded Ukraine from the north in February, has announced it is to hold military training exercises during August. Reuters reports the defence ministry said the exercises will involve live firing and be held in two stages, firstly from 9-11 August in Belarus, and then at the Ashuluk training base in Russia from 22-25 August. The Ashuluk testing range is in the Astrakhan region of southern Russia, which borders Kazakhstan and the Caspian Sea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:25:53Z'}, {'id': '62f221498f080e23bc39f16c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Telegram, Ukraine’s emergency services have detailed some of the evacuation work it carried out in the last 24 hours. It said: Over the past day, emergency workers evacuated six people from Kramatorsk and Bakhmut districts. Rescuers from Donetsk region also helped 102 people during the evacuation in the city of Toretsk, including 10 children and 10 people with disabilities. During the evacuation at the railway station in Pokrovsk, assistance was provided to 735 people, including 69 children and nine people with physical disabilities. Also updating the public on evacuation numbers, Maksym Kozytskyi, the governor of Lviv, said 161 people arrived in his region from the east of the country on two evacuation trains in the last 24 hours. He stated that 747 people departed from the Lviv region to Przemyśl in Poland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:26:16Z'}, {'id': '62f21a7b8f080e23bc39f10d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has issued its military briefing for the day. It says that Ukrainian forces shelled 10 of the 266 settlements that it claims to have “liberated” from Ukraine alongside Russia and the similarly self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic. The DPR is recognised as a legitimate authority by only three UN member states including Russia, and its claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:26:41Z'}, {'id': '62f2179c8f08adcf60a32c61', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is an image sent to us over the newswires of the Liberian-flagged ship Ocean Lion, which departed from Ukraine’s Chornomorsk earlier today carrying 64,720 tonnes of corn.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T08:19:42Z'}, {'id': '62f20d648f08adcf60a32c29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Stryuk, Ukraine’s mayor of the occupied city of Sievierodonetsk, has been speaking on Ukrainian television about what he knows of the the conditions there. He described the situation, saying that occupation authorities are trying to create a picture of the restoration of normal life, and teams are being formed in the city to clean the streets, with the offer of food as payment for labour. He claimed there is no running water and the sewage system does not work either. He said the city lacks the specialists to restore communications. He also claimed that almost all the people who tried to return to the city, stayed there for several days, then realised that it would be impossible to overwinter in these conditions, and they left again. A clip of Stryuk’s interveiw was posted to Telegram by Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, Serhai Haidai. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T07:36:36Z'}, {'id': '62f20c1c8f080e23bc39f0b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'NewsGuard, a New York-based firm that studies and tracks online misinformation, has identified 250 websites actively spreading Russian disinformation about the war, with dozens of new sites added in recent months. They appear to be part of a concerted effort to circumvent the European Union’s efforts to block Russian propaganda and misinformation about the war. Claims on these sites include allegations that Ukraine’s army has staged some deadly Russian attacks to generate global support, that Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy is faking public appearances, or that Ukrainian refugees are committing crimes in Germany and Poland. Some of the sites pose as independent thinktanks or news outlets. About half are English-language, while others are in French, German or Italian. Many were set up long before the war and were not obviously tied to the Russian government until they suddenly began echoing Kremlin talking points. “They may be establishing sleeper sites,” said NewsGuard co-CEO Gordon Crovitz. Sleeper sites are websites created for a disinformation campaign that lay largely dormant, slowly building an audience through innocuous or unrelated posts, and then switching to propaganda or disinformation at an appointed time. While NewsGuard’s analysis found that much of the disinformation about the war in Ukraine is coming from Russia, it did find instances of false claims with a pro-Ukrainian slant. YouTube, TikTok and Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram, all pledged to remove RT and Sputnik from their platforms within the European Union. But the Associated Press reports that researchers have found that in some cases all Russia had to do to evade the ban was to post the same content from a different account.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T07:51:34Z'}, {'id': '62f203ae8f080e23bc39f06a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the Russian-imposed military-civilian administration in the occupied Kherson region of Ukraine, has spoken to the RIA Novosti news agency. He said that the forces in occupied Kherson are ready to defend themselves against any attempt by the Ukrainians to retake the region. It quotes him saying: The Kherson region is ready to repel the attempts of the offensive by Ukrainian militants, if such a criminal order is given to them by the regime of Zelenskiy, who is ready to wage war to the last Ukrainian for the sake of destroying the country. Reliable protection of the borders of the region is provided by the Russian ministry of defence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T06:52:36Z'}, {'id': '62f2021f8f08adcf60a32bb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images to be distributed from Ukraine on the newswires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T07:10:51Z'}, {'id': '62f2008e8f08adcf60a32baf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters reports that the Turkish defence ministry has said two further grain-carrying ships have sailed from Ukraine’s Chornomorsk port on Tuesday, as part of the deal to unblock Ukrainian sea exports. The Ocean Lion, which departed for South Korea, is carrying 64,720 tonnes of corn, it said, while the Rahmi Yağcı is carrying 5,300 tonnes of sunflower meal to Istanbul. The four ships that left Ukraine earlier are anchored near Istanbul and will be inspected on Tuesday, the defence ministry statement said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T06:38:55Z'}, {'id': '62f1fa388f080e23bc39f026', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rodion Miroshnik, who is styled as the ambassador to Russia for the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic, has claimed on Telegram that four people were killed yesterday in the territory occupied by the similarly self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic in occupied Ukraine. He also states that 17 more were injured “of which one was blown up by a PFM-1 ‘petal’ mine”. The claims have not been independently verified. Ukraine is a signatory to the 1997 Ottawa convention, which aims to prohibit the stockpiling and use of anti-personnel mines such as the Soviet-designed PFM-1. Russia is not.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T06:18:37Z'}, {'id': '62f1f1a78f080e23bc39f000', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged western nations to ban entry of all Russian citizens. In an interview with the Washington Post, Zelenskiy said the most important sanctions against Russia would be to close borders, “because the Russians are taking away someone else’s land”. He said Russians should “live in their own world until they change their philosophy”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T05:56:41Z'}, {'id': '62f1f2aa8f08b2ca242c7cfa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s assault towards the town of Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine has been its most successful axis in the Donbas region in the past month, the UK Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence update. Despite this, it had only gained 10km in that time, while elsewhere in Donbas it had gained only 3km over 30 days – “almost certainly significantly less than planned”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T06:19:03Z'}, {'id': '62f1e8518f080e23bc39efce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With Russia and Ukraine trading accusations over endangering the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station, and the head of the UN saying that attacks on the station were “suicidal”, we prepared this explainer on what’s at stake.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T05:12:40Z'}, {'id': '62f1e48f8f08adcf60a32b19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is scheduled to launch an Iranian satellite into orbit on Tuesday, but Tehran has brushed off fears that Moscow might use it in the war against Ukraine. Iran’s Khayyam satellite is scheduled to take off from the Moscow-operated Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 05:52 GMT, three weeks after Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, met Iranian counterpart Ebrahim Raisi and Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei in Tehran. Iran has sought to deflect suspicions that Moscow could use Khayyam to improve its surveillance of military targets in Ukraine. Last week, the Washington Post quoted anonymous western intelligence officials as saying that Russia “plans to use the satellite for several months or longer” to assist its war efforts before allowing Iran to take control. But the Iranian Space Agency said on Sunday that the Islamic republic would control the Khayyam satellite “from day one”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T06:19:56Z'}, {'id': '62f1d44d8f08b2ca242c7c5d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US believes Russia has suffered between 70,000 and 80,000 casualties, either killed or wounded, since its invasion of Ukraine began on 24 February. Colin Kahl, the Pentagon’s top policy official said: “The Russians are taking a tremendous number of casualties on the other side of the equation. I think it’s safe to suggest that the Russians are probably taking 70 or 80,000 casualties in less than six months.” Kahl admitted that the Ukraine side also had significant losses of manpower on the battlefield, but gave no figures. “Both sides are taking casualties. The war is the most intense conventional conflict in Europe since the second world war,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T04:33:16Z'}, {'id': '62f1d2e08f08b2ca242c7c58', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has reported intense Russian shelling across the frontlines on Tuesday as both sides traded blame for the weekend strike on the Zaporizhzhia nuclear complex that triggered international concern about a potential atomic disaster. Heavy fighting was reported in frontline towns near the eastern city of Donetsk, where Ukrainian officials said Russian troops were launching waves of attacks. “The situation in the region is tense - shelling is constant throughout the front line ... The enemy is also using air strikes a great deal,” Donetsk regional governor Pavlo Kyrylenko told Ukrainian television. “The enemy is having no success. Donetsk region is holding.” In the south-east, the key Antonovsky bridge over the Dnieper River in Kherson region was targeted again by Ukrainian forces trying to disrupt Russian supply lines. Yuri Sobolevsky, deputy head of Kherson regional council ousted by Russian occupation forces, said on Telegram the bridge had been seriously damaged after “overnight actions”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T04:32:28Z'}, {'id': '62f1cc318f080e23bc39ef37', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning, and welcome back to our live coverage of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. These are the latest developments Ukraine has arrested two people working for Russian intelligence services who planned to kill the Ukrainian defence minister and the head of the country’s military intelligence agency, Ukraine’s domestic security service said on Monday. The security service of Ukraine foiled the plot by the Russian GRU military intelligence agency to use a sabotage group to carry out three murders including that of a prominent Ukrainian activist, the agency said. The US will provide an additional $4.5bn (£3.7bn) to Ukraine’s government, bringing its total budgetary support since Russia’s February invasion to $8.5bn (£7bn), the US Agency for International Development has announced. The funding, coordinated with the US Treasury Department through the World Bank, will go to Ukraine’s government in tranches, beginning with a $3bn (£2.5bn) disbursement in August, USAid, the Agency for International Development, said. Russia has suspended an arrangement that allowed US and Russian inspectors to visit each other’s nuclear weapons sites under the 2010 New Start treaty, in a fresh blow to arms control. Mutual inspections had been suspended as a health precaution since the start of the Covid pandemic, but a foreign ministry statement on Monday added another reason Russia is unwilling to restart them. It argued that US sanctions imposed because of the invasion of Ukraine stopped Russian inspectors travelling to the US. It is highly likely Russia is deploying anti-personnel mines to protect and deter freedom of movement along its defensive lines in Donetsk and Kramatorsk in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region, according to the UK Ministry of Defence. The ministry called the PFM-1 and PFM-1S mines – also known as “butterfly mines” – “deeply controversial and indiscriminate weapons” with the potential to inflict widespread casualties among both the military and the local civilian population. Two more ships, carrying corn and soybeans, departed Ukrainian ports, taking the total to 10 ships carrying Ukrainian grain exports since the UN deal to unblock Ukraine’s grain exports was struck, Reuters reported. Future ships exporting Ukraine grain through the Black Sea will now be protected by a 10 nautical mile buffer zone, according to long-awaited procedures agreed by Russia, Ukraine, Turkey and the United Nations. The first grain carrying ship to depart Ukrainian ports after the UN-brokered deal is looking for another port to unload its cargo after the initial Lebanese buyer refused delivery due to its five-month delay, Reuters reported. The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom has called for the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant to be made a military-free zone, warning of the risk of a Chornobyl-style nuclear disaster after shelling of the site caused a reactor to shut down on Saturday. Russia and Ukraine continue to trade accusations over is responsible for the shelling, with the UN calling for international inspectors to be given access. According to reports from the head of the Russian-installed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region, the nuclear power station is currently operating normally. The Russian-installed head of the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region signed a decree on Monday providing for a referendum on joining Russia, in the latest sign that Moscow is moving ahead with its plans to annex seized Ukrainian territory. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has ruled out any peace talks with Russia if the country proceeds with referendums in the occupied areas. The Kremlin said on Monday there was no basis for a meeting between the Russian and Ukrainian presidents at the moment. Negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv have been stalled for months, with each side blaming the other for a lack of progress, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T06:22:07Z'}, {'id': '62f08d368f08cf33fef37250', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The family of one of the Australian soldiers killed by rogue Afghan national army sergeant Hekmatullah says Australia was treated with contempt by its closest ally, the US, after it agreed to release the self-professed terrorist from prison. The Guardian revealed on Monday that the former Afghan national army sergeant, and Taliban plant, Hekmatullah, is again at liberty, and housed under Taliban protection, in the former diplomatic quarter of the Afghan capital Kabul. He was returned to Afghanistan from Qatar – where he was being held under house arrest. Several sources have independently confirmed to the Guardian Hekmatullah’s repatriation to Afghanistan.\n“If I am released I will continue killing foreigners,” Hekmatullah told an official of the former Afghan government when his transfer to Qatar was being negotiated in 2020. “I will continue killing Australians and I will kill you as well because you are a puppet of foreigners,” he said. Further details have now emerged around the deal between the US and the Taliban that saw Hekmatullah released from Bagram prison in Afghanistan and transferred to Qatar, including: that Australia was never shown a draft of the agreement which saw him transferred; and that the former Afghan government had considered handing Hekmatullah over to Australian custody. The acting prime minister, Richard Marles, asked twice on Tuesday about Hekmatullah’s liberty, refused to comment. But the father of one of the Australian soldiers slain by Hekmatullah said Australia had been “sidelined” by the deal brokered between the US and the Taliban which released the terrorist from prison: a deal that excluded the democratically elected government of Afghanistan, as well as all of America’s allies throughout the two decades-long war. “Australia was sidelined by the US,” said Hugh Poate, whose son, 23-year-old Robert Poate, was killed by Hekmatullah, then an Afghan National army soldier and supposed ally, in an insider-attack in 2012. “America completely disregarded the concerns of its supposed ally under the Anzus Treaty, Australia was treated with contempt. “And the end result of this war was that Australia lost 41 soldiers killed, 241 wounded and over 500 who have since committed suicide, for the Taliban to be replaced with the Taliban.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nPoate, whose book Failures of Command details a litany of systemic errors in the lead-up to the Australians’ killings, and attempts to cover those up, said Hekmatullah had vowed to kill again, and remained a danger. “His stated further intentions of terrorism are even more of a reason for the US to now target Hekmatullah. The US let him go free, and the US now has a moral obligation to make up for that. “Unlike other terrorists that are still being killed with drones, as recently as last week with [al-Qaida leader Ayman] al-Zawahiri in Kabul, Hekmatullah was given a fair trial in the supreme court of Afghanistan where he proudly confessed to his crimes,” Poate said. Proposal to put terrorist in Australian custody abandoned On 29 August 2012, at Wahab, a patrol base in Afghanistan’s Uruzgan province, Hekmatullah, then an Afghan National Army sergeant, killed three unarmed, off-duty Australian troops. They were L/Cpl Stjepan Milosevic, 40; Spr James Martin, 21; and Poate. He then fled into the Baluchi valley.\nHekmatullah was arrested, after being found hiding in the Pakistani city of Quetta in February 2013. Charged, tried and convicted of three counts of murder, he was sentenced to death, but served only seven years in Bagram prison before being moved to house arrest in Qatar in 2020 as a condition of the US-Taliban peace deal. After the fall of Kabul to the Taliban, he was repatriated to Afghanistan “a returning hero”, according to Afghan sources. Hekmatullah has reportedly been housed in the former diplomatic quarter of Wazir Akbar Khan, in a heavily secured property in a district adjacent to the clandestine former home of al-Zawahiri, the former al-Qaida leader assassinated 10 days ago by a US drone strike as he stood on the balcony of his villa. The Guardian has also learned the former Afghanistan government contemplated transferring Hekmatullah to Australia’s custody when his liberty was being negotiated between the Taliban and the US. “Hekmatullah remained a priority for Australia and the families of the Australian victims,” Ahmad Shuja Jamal, the then director general for international relations and regional cooperation at the Afghan National Security Council, has told the Guardian. “The Office of the National Security Council briefly considered arranging for a bilateral treaty to give Australia custody of Hekmatullah so he could serve out the rest of his sentence, but it was abandoned for technical and political difficulties.” After discussions within the Afghan government, the proposal was not formally put to the Australian government. Pleas to keep Hekmatullah in prison ignored Western governments resisted pardoning six of 5,000 prisoners the Taliban wanted released as a pre-condition of entering peace negotiations with the US, because of the severity, or nature, of their crimes. Hekmatullah was one of these six terrorists. They were all, ultimately, released. At least 900 of those former Taliban prisoners returned to the battlefield, destabilising republican Afghanistan, and contributing to the fall of the democratically elected government, Jamal said. Jamal – co-author of a forthcoming book, The Decline and Fall of Republican Afghanistan, written with ANU Prof William Maley – said the then Morrison government pressed both the Trump administration and the Afghan government for Hekmatullah to remain imprisoned. “The Afghan government assured Australia that it would do all it could to prevent the release of the convict of concern,” Jamal wrote in an account of events provided to the Guardian. Among those assurances was an assertion that Hekmatullah’s crimes could not be pardoned under Islamic law, and he could therefore not be released.\n“By August, nearly all the 5000 convicts except six had been released. The six included Hekmatullah and other convicts of concern to France and the United States. The Afghanistan government, through the United States, offered the Taliban to release any other six convicts instead, but the United States failed to secure the Taliban’s agreement.” But the US-Taliban deal was running “behind schedule” and an agreement was brokered to move the six to house arrest in Qatar. Government sources have confirmed Australia was not party to those negotiations, nor allowed to see draft copies of the agreement before it was confirmed. The then Afghanistan government was placed in an invidious position, Jamal said of the 2020 negotiations, of balancing the often antithetical pressures of law, diplomacy, peace and security. “Most of the convicts had been involved in attacks against the Afghan people and state. Many of them took up arms again upon release, providing a deadly illustration of how the US-Taliban deal undermined the viability of the Afghan republic. “With the benefit of hindsight, better choices might have been made, but governments rarely have both the luxury of context and liberty of action.” The Guardian approached the US state department seeking comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T21:40:15Z'}, {'id': '62f279eb8f084d500ca22387', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities in a Tuscan town have urged residents to close their windows and refrain from hanging out washing as they tackle a plague of midges that has been tormenting locals and tourists for weeks. Restaurants and bar owners in Orbetello, well known for its lagoon and long stretches of sandy beach overlooked by Monte Argentario, say business has been badly hit as customers avoid venturing out for dinner. “We are forced to close two hours early,” the owner of Caffè sul Corso di Luigi Drogo, told Corriere della Sera. “This is our 2022 season.” Some establishments have switched off outside lights and are taking dinner bookings only until 9pm, but it has done little to boost trade. “Takings are down by 60% despite these measures,” said Marco Di Pietro, the owner of Ovosodo restaurant, while describing the “psychological horror” inflicted by the midges on outdoor diners. “Thousands of midges gather around the light bulbs and move like a disturbing wave between the outdoor tables,” he told Corriere.\nLa Repubblica quoted a visitor from Rome as saying Orbetello had been “completely overrun” by the insects. “For almost a month it has been impossible to walk along the lagoon. Now it has become impossible to even dine or have an aperitif outside. The situation reached such an extreme yesterday that many shops and restaurants were forced to close at around 9pm.” Mauro Lenzi, a biologist, said last month that the infestation is linked to the conditions of the lagoon amid high temperatures that have reduced the presence of the midges’ natural predators, such as frogs, bats and various birds. Authorities said they would undertake pest control procedures overnight on Wednesday – the fourth time the town has been fumigated in several weeks. But residents complained that a deep disinfestation, which usually takes place in the spring, was skipped this year. They are not the only ones being invaded by insects this summer – the nearby Castiglione della Pescaia has been hit by swarms of wasps, Corriere reported. Leonardo Marras, a councillor in Tuscany, said: “Today it is difficult to find a solution to a problem that should have been dealt with earlier. What I can say is that we are here for any citizens who express concern or whose season has been ruined by these insects.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T16:29:59Z'}, {'id': '62f254418f086b906d74e6ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has launched an Iranian satellite from Kazakhstan amid concerns it could be used for battlefield surveillance in Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Iran has denied that the Khayyam satellite, which was delivered into orbit onboard a Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur cosmodrome, would ever be under Russian control. But the Washington Post previously reported that Moscow told Tehran it “plans to use the satellite for several months, or longer, to enhance its surveillance of military targets” in Ukraine, according to two US officials. The satellite, named after the Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam, was built by Russia and will include a high-resolution camera that would give Tehran new capabilities to monitor sensitive facilities in Israel and the Gulf, the paper reported. Iran’s space agency has said it would control the satellite “from day one” and that “no third country is able to access its information”.\nRussia’s launch of the satellite comes at a pivotal moment for its space agency Roscosmos, which has threatened to cut back on cooperation with western countries and bring in a top-level shake-up, with longtime head Dmitry Rogozin dismissed by Vladimir Putin. Even as relations between Russia and the US cooled, Roscosmos and Nasa had maintained basic levels of cooperation including ferrying astronauts to the International Space Station (ISS). Russia has threatened to leave the ISS in 2025 if sanctions are not lifted. Isolated by the west, Russia has increasingly turned toward Africa, the Middle East and Asia as sources of trade and diplomatic support. And it has touted its ability to launch satellites onboard its heavy-lifting Soyuz rockets as one benefit of cooperation. “Due to Khayyam satellite’s weight of more than half a tonne and the very high success rate of the Soyuz launcher, the launch of the Khayyam satellite has been entrusted to Russia,” a statement on the Iranian space agency’s website noted, according to AFP. “As ever before, today Russia is open to cooperation in the field of space exploration with all interested countries and partners,” said the Roscosmos chief, Yury Borisov, calling it “an important milestone for Russian-Iranian bilateral cooperation”.\nRussia has looked to Iran as a source of expertise on adjusting to the new sanctions that have been introduced by the US and other western countries. Russia is believed to be interested in tapping into Iran’s experience on topics from circumventing banking sanctions to maintaining aircraft without readily available western parts. Putin met the Iranian supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, during a rare visit to Iran in July. While Russian media portrayed the trip as a signal that the Kremlin remains a power broker in the Middle East, a Pentagon spokesperson said the visit showed “the degree to which Mr Putin and Russia are increasingly isolated”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T14:44:17Z'}, {'id': '62f21cf98f080e23bc39f120', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Soaring temperatures are prompting Switzerland’s melting glaciers to reveal their secrets, with hikers this summer chancing upon two sets of unidentified human remains and a plane wreckage lost for more than half a century. Two French alpinists found human bones last Wednesday while scaling the Chessjen glacier in the southern canton of Valais, a police spokesperson confirmed on Monday. The skeleton was airlifted from the glacier by helicopter on the same day. The bones were discovered near an old path that fell into disuse about 10 years ago, said Dario Andenmatten, the warden of the Britannia mountain hut from where many Alpinists start their ascents in the region. The two hikers probably only made their discovery because they were relying on an old map. Since little remained of the body other than bare bones, Andenmatten said he expected the person to have died “sometime in the 1970s or 80s”. A week earlier, another body had been found on the Stockji glacier near the resort of Zermatt, north-west of the Matterhorn. In both cases, Valais police said the process of identifying human remains through DNA analysis was still underway and would take “a few more days”. Police in the Alpine region maintain a list of about 300 cases of people who have gone missing since 1925. It includes the supermarket chain millionaire Karl-Erivan Haub – a triple German, Russian and US citizen who went missing in the Zermatt region while training for a skiing tour on 7 April 2018. German media have linked the body discovered on the Stockji glacier to Haub, who was legally declared dead in 2021. However, one of the two hikers who discovered the body told Blick newspaper that the clothes they found were neon-coloured, “in the style of the 80s”. The corpse was mummified and slightly damaged, “but almost complete”, said Luc Lechanoine, 55.\nIn the first week of August, a mountain guide discovered the wreckage of a plane that crashed over the Aletsch glacier, near the Jungfrau and Mönch mountain peaks, in June 1968. “From afar, I thought I was looking at two backpacks”, said Dominik Nellen, 38. Closer inspection revealed the objects to be wreckage pieces of a Piper Cherokee aircraft that crashed in the area on June 30 1968, carrying on board a teacher, a chief medical officer and his son, all from Zurich. The bodies were recovered at the time, but the wreckage was not. After a winter with relatively little snowfall, the Swiss Alps have already experienced two severe summer heatwaves. In July, authorities advised alpinists against scaling the Matterhorn because of the unusually high temperatures, which nearly reached 30C in Zermatt. During the July heatwave, the elevation at which water froze was measured at a record high of 5,184 metres, compared with the normal summer level of 3,000-3,500 metres.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-10T08:03:49Z'}]}