{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘An ecological miracle’: Taiwan’s fireflies are flirting in the dark again', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-22T12:47:07Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/22/ecological-miracle-fireflies-taiwan-flirting-dark', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Taiwan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Insects', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/insects'}, {'tagTitle': 'Conservation', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation'}, {'tagTitle': 'Animals', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'Environment', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment'}, {'tagTitle': 'Wildlife', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Davidson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-davidson'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '626296f48f088371a5f40235', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fears are growing for hundreds of civilians holed up in the Azovstal steel factory on Mariupol’s left bank, with the last remaining, outgunned contingent of Ukrainian fighters. According to local officials, between 300 and 1,000 people, including women and children, could still be trapped in the steelworks, a sprawling mass of tunnels and workshops spread over four square miles in the south-east of the city, scene of the worst humanitarian crisis of the nearly two-month war. Speaking in Moscow on Thursday, Vladimir Putin, who claimed the city had fallen into Russian hands, apart from the Azovstal metalworks, ordered his forces not to storm the factory complex, after his defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, said the Russian army was still fighting thousands of Ukrainian soldiers there.\nThe Russian president described a plan to penetrate the complex as impractical, and called instead for a blockade of the area “so that a fly can’t get through”. Putin told Shoigu, in remarks broadcast on state television: “There is no need to climb into these catacombs and crawl underground.” However, due to the lack of telecommunication in the city, after the Russian troops bombed radio towers in Mariupol during the first days of invasion, concerns are rising over the fate of civilians and soldiers.\nBritish intelligence suggests Putin’s decision to blockade the steel plant probably indicates a desire to contain Ukrainian resistance in the city and free up Russian forces to be deployed in eastern Ukraine. The mayor of Mariupol, Vadym Boichenko, appealed on Friday for the “full evacuation” of the devastated city, where, according to local officials, 100,000 people remain trapped. “We don’t know the precise civilian figure because we haven’t been able to get them out. We need a day’s ceasefire for this to happen,” Boichenko, who is no longer in Mariupol, told the Guardian. “The civilians were living in desperate conditions in a network of underground tunnels, surrounded by Russian troops.’’\nIn a statement, the Russian defence ministry said Moscow was “ready at any moment” to announce a “humanitarian pause” for the evacuation of civilians, but only when “white flags are raised”. “If such signs are found in any part of the Azovstal metallurgical plant, Russia’s armed forces … will immediately stop any hostilities and provide a safe exit,” the ministry said, adding that Ukrainian soldiers who have surrendered will be “guaranteed” their life. Putin on Friday accused Kyiv of refusing to allow Ukrainian troops to surrender in Mariupol. “All servicemen of the Ukrainian armed forces, militants of the national battalions and foreign mercenaries who laid down their arms are guaranteed life, decent treatment in accordance with international law, and the provision of quality medical care,” he said, adding: “But the Kyiv regime is not allowing for this opportunity to be used.” Boichenko said Russia had been hiding evidence of its “barbaric” war crimes in Mariupol by burying the bodies of civilians killed by shelling in a new mass grave, as a US satellite imagery company released photos that appeared to match the site. According to local officials, Russian trucks had collected corpses from the streets of the port city and transported them to the nearby village of Manhush. They were then secretly thrown into a mass grave in a field next to the settlement’s old cemetery, he said. “The invaders are concealing evidence of their crimes”, Boichenko said. “The cemetery is located near a petrol station to the left side of a circular road. The Russians have dug huge trenches, 30 metres wide. They chuck people in.” “The bodies of the dead were being brought by truckload and actually simply being dumped in mounds,” an aide to Boichenko, Piotr Andryushchenko, said on the Telegram messaging app. The graves could hold up to 9,000 bodies, the Mariupol city council said via Telegram. The mayor estimated more than 20,000 Mariupol residents had been killed since Russian forces began attacking the city during the early days of Putin’s invasion. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said diplomatic efforts to end the war remained stalled. “Our latest proposal that was handed to the Ukrainian negotiators some five days ago and formulated taking into account the comments we received from them remains unanswered,” he said. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said he has neither seen nor heard about the document. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, will visit Moscow on 25 April to meet Putin, a United Nations spokesperson said. On Friday, the UN human rights office (OHCHR) sounded the alarm about growing evidence of war crimes in Ukraine, urging Moscow and Kyiv to order combatants to respect international law.\n“Russian armed forces have indiscriminately shelled and bombed populated areas, killing civilians and wrecking hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure, actions that may amount to war crimes,” said the UN high commissioner for human rights, Michelle Bachelet. UN human rights monitors in Ukraine have also documented what appeared to be the use of weapons with indiscriminate effects, causing civilian casualties, by Ukrainian armed forces in the east of the country, the OHCHR said. It added that from the start of the war on 24 February until 20 April, monitors in Ukraine had verified 5,264 civilian casualties – 2,345 killed and 2,919 injured. “We know the actual numbers are going to be much higher as the horrors inflicted in areas of intense fighting, such as Mariupol, come to light,” Bachelet said. “The scale of summary executions of civilians in areas previously occupied by Russian forces are also emerging. The preservation of evidence and decent treatment of mortal remains must be ensured, as well as psychological and other relief for victims and their relatives.” During a mission to Bucha on 9 April, UN human rights officers documented the unlawful killing, including by summary execution, of about 50 civilians, it said.\nOn Thursday, the Guardian revealed the use by Russian troops of a number of weapons widely banned across the world, which have killed hundreds of civilians in Kyiv. Evidence collected by the Guardian during a visit to Bucha, Hostomel and Borodianka, and reviewed by independent weapons experts, showed Russian troops had used cluster munitions, cluster bombs and extremely powerful unguided bombs in populated areas, which had destroyed at least eight civilian buildings.\nMeanwhile, according to a top Russian general quoted by Russian news agencies, Moscow will try to seize eastern and southern Ukraine as its main objective in the war.\n“Since the start of the second phase of the special operation … one of the tasks of the Russian army is to establish full control over the Donbas and southern Ukraine,” Maj Gen Rustam Minnekaev said. He added this would create a “land corridor” to annexed Crimea. “Control over the south of Ukraine is another way to Transnistria, where there is also evidence that the Russian-speaking population is being oppressed,” he said at a meeting in Russia’s central Sverdlovsk region, referring to a pro-Russian breakaway region of Moldova. Minnekaev’s words follow heavy shelling in the eastern Donbas as Russia tried to advance towards settlements, the British Ministry of Defence said. Russia’s defence ministry said it struck 58 military targets in Ukraine overnight, including sites where troops, fuel depots and military equipment were concentrated. And as the Orthodox Christian Easter approaches, Zelenskiy, said Russia had rejected a proposed Easter truce but he remained hopeful of prospects for peace.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T17:00:47Z'}, {'id': '6262645d8f08c1667906c96e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s two presidential contenders have traded their last blows before Sunday’s deciding runoff, with polls suggesting fear of a Marine Le Pen victory was outweighing dislike of Emmanuel Macron and his record. Hours before a media blackout was due to begin at midnight, the incumbent and his far-right challenger made their final pitches to undecided voters in radio interviews and on walkabouts, with Le Pen saying Macron’s polling lead would be proved misleading. “Polls aren’t what decide an election,” the Rassemblement National (National Rally) leader said in Étaples in her northern stronghold, attacking the current president’s “condescension and arrogance” and insisting her policies held up under scrutiny. “I call on people to form their own opinion, read what I actually propose,” she said, adding that Macron “calls millions of French voters ‘far right’; for him it’s an insult. I’ve never expressed even the slightest hostility to his voters.” In a radio interview she went further, saying Macron “does not like the French”.\nAgain slamming her centrist rival’s unpopular plan to extend the retirement age to 65, saying it amounted to “a life sentence”, Le Pen said the choice facing French voters on Sunday was “fundamental. It is in the hands of the French people. It is Macron, or France.” For his part, Macron accused Le Pen of trying to divide France and stigmatise Muslims with her proposal to outlaw the hijab in public. “The far right lives off fear and anger to create resentment,” he said. “It says excluding parts of society is the answer.” Much of Le Pen’s programme, including her plan to give French nationals priority on jobs and benefits, “abandons the founding texts of Europe that protect individuals, human rights and freedoms”, the president said on French radio. Her proposals would exclude non- and dual-nationals from many public sector jobs and restrict their access to welfare, also cancelling automatic citizenship rights for children of non-nationals born in France and making naturalisation harder. He also dismissed his challenger’s plans to tackle the cost of living crisis, the main focus of her campaign, saying she “gives the impression she has an answer, but her answers aren’t viable” – although he conceded Le Pen had “managed to draw on some of the things I did not manage to do to pacify some of people’s anger”. The cost of living has emerged as the election’s main campaign issue, with a sustained squeeze leaving many voters saying they have difficulty making ends meet despite support during the pandemic, caps on rising fuel prices, and data suggesting that all but the poorest 5% of French households are better off than five years ago. On his final campaign visit in Figeac in the rural south-west, Macron promised to radically improve public services, including healthcare and transport, in small- and mid-sized country towns, saying a lack of investment outside big cities, in particular in medical provision, was “a real issue that fosters real anger”. Polls published on Thursday and Friday after Wednesday’s fractious live TV debate showed Macron’s score stable or rising at between 55.5% and 57.5% and Le Pen’s between 42.5% and 44.5% – a lead for the incumbent of between 10 and 14 points, but a far closer race than the 66%-34% score when the same two contestants met in the previous 2017 election. The narrowing of the gap partly reflects the success of Le Pen’s long drive to sanitise her party and normalise its policies, although she complained bitterly on Friday of a concerted attempt by the media and commentators to “retoxify” the Le Pen brand. But also reflected in the figures is a strong public perception of Macron as an aloof, arrogant and high-handed leader, out of touch with the concerns of ordinary people. Many leftists in particular feel also he has veered decisively to the right in office despite his 2017 pledge to be “neither of the left nor the right”. Polls also predict turnout at between 72% and 74%, the lowest for a presidential runoff since 1969. The turnout for 2017’s second round was 74.56%. Easter holidays are under way across much of France, boosting an abstention rate already inflated by the many French voters who feel politically orphaned by the two-round race and no longer represented. Both candidates are seeking to win over in particular those of the 7.7 million voters who backed the radical left firebrand Jean-Luc Mélenchon in the first round on 10 April who now say they are tempted either to stay away or spoil their ballots. Starting at midnight, neither candidate will be allowed to give interviews, distribute flyers or hold campaign events until polling stations close on Sunday evening and initial estimates of results start coming in. Polls will open on Sunday at 8am and close at 7pm across most of France and 8pm in major cities. Voting opens on Saturday in France’s overseas territories.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-23T13:24:30Z'}, {'id': '6262c3868f08c1667906ce85', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A cat that was missing for five years has been reunited with its owner after being found on an offshore oil rig. Workers at the oil rig contacted the Scottish SPCA on Thursday after they found the animal in a shipping container originally from Peterhead. On Friday, staff from the Scottish animal welfare charity collected the microchipped cat, after they were flown back to the mainland by helicopter. The cat is believed to have been living as a stray around Peterhead prison in Aberdeenshire. Commenting on the rescue, SPCA animal rescue officer Aimee Findlay said she had “no idea how the cat ended up” in the container – but it had been nicknamed One-eyed Joe by the prison officers who have been feeding him for five years. She added: “After checking him for a microchip, it turns out his real name is Dexter,” she said. “We are so glad that he was well looked after for the time he was missing but we’re even more delighted to be able to reunite him with his original owner, thanks to his microchip being up to date.” According to local residents, the cat has chosen to sleep at the prison, where staff “fuss over” him and he is “much loved”. The charity urged anyone who finds an injured animal or an animal in distress to contact its helpline on 03000 999 999.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-23T13:22:58Z'}, {'id': '6262bb8b8f08c1667906cde7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was called the Intelligence Factory: a warren of rooms and offices in which, by the end of the war, thousands of people worked round the clock decoding and processing enemy communications. Block A at Bletchley Park, the top secret second world war code-breaking centre in Buckinghamshire that was the forerunner of GCHQ, has been restored and opens to the public for the first time on Thursday. Using testimonies from veterans, surviving documents and photographs, and interactive reconstructions, the exhibition shows the industrial scale of the operation that was critical to the allied victory.\nBlock A opened in late 1942, built to house the ever-expanding number of people needed to decode, analyse and process a growing mountain of war communications. Bletchley Park bosses scrambled to recruit more and more people – 75% of them women, many in their late teens or early 20s, mostly doing tedious, repetitive tasks in conditions of extreme secrecy. By the end of 1945, almost 9,000 people were working three shifts a day at Bletchley. They were billeted with local residents, or housed in specially constructed huts containing rows of camp beds, and fed canteen meals of mince and potatoes or corned beef with prunes.\nOn arrival, all had to sign a document headed “Secrecy”, which instructed them to never talk about their work at meals, on transport or even “by your own fireside”. It warned: “There is nothing to be gained by chatter but the satisfaction of idle vanity, or idle curiosity: there is everything to be lost.” For most, it was a far cry from the experience of Alan Turing, the brilliant mathematician who cracked the Enigma code and whose story was told in the Oscar-nominated 2014 film The Imitation Game. “Turing was a genius, who worked largely in intellectual isolation,” said Thomas Cheetham, research officer at Bletchley Park. “In fact, this place was like a factory – busy, bustling, noisy, lots of people doing small tasks. For many, it was their first job – the average age was 19 – and it was quite boring work. And they were never given the big picture of what was being achieved at Bletchley.” The exhibition includes a recreation of the naval plotting room, where the movements of ships and submarines were tracked by pins and string placed in floor-to-ceiling maps. An original Hollerith machine that organised and processed data using 2m individual punch cards every week – a job that today’s computer technology could complete in moments – stands in another room. Pneumatic tubes, known as “spit and suck”, kept vital information flowing around Block A. Its distinctive whooshing sound, along with the clatter of the Hollerith and the general background noise of people working at close quarters, provided a constant soundtrack to the centre. The 24/7 activity was backed up by a gargantuan management operation, with thousands of memos posted on noticeboards. One, dated 16 June 1942, states that “it is NOT permissible to issue second helpings” at mealtimes due to strict rationing. Another, issued on 24 February 1943, advised that “beer will be available daily in Hut 2 (Recreation Hut) between noon and 2pm, and 6pm and 8pm”.\nKay Pickett (née Harrison), now 96, who started work at Bletchley Park in June 1944 at the age of 18, said she had no real idea of the significance of the work until much later in her life. “Everything was so secret, and we weren’t allowed to talk about it. Now I know how important it was.” Erica Munro, exhibitions manager, said: “In the intelligence factory, there was a very strong female experience – partly through the sheer numbers, and partly through the variety of work that they were doing. It’s been a pleasure to include so many female voices in audio points through the exhibition.” The importance of Bletchley Park to the overall allied effort was “incalculable”, said Cheetham. “Everybody tried to do signals intelligence. Some countries were very bad at it. The Americans were quite good, but even they didn’t achieve what the British achieved at Bletchley Park: having one central signals intelligence centre that handled everything. Britain was so far ahead.” The Intelligence Factory opens at Bletchley Park on Thursday 28 April.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T17:09:29Z'}, {'id': '62629f398f088371a5f40292', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At an underground sports centre in central Helsinki, a group of teenagers were playing floorball, a type of hockey popular in the Nordic country during the long winter months. Not far behind one of the goals, a small door led to the “control room”, a dimly lit space with large oxygen systems and electricity generators. If the worst fears of Europe materialise and Moscow’s war in Ukraine spills across the continent to other neighbours of Russia, sports centres like these can quickly be turned into emergency bomb shelters ready to accommodate thousands of Finns. “I sleep much better at night knowing we have these bomb shelters. Especially now with what is happening in Ukraine,” said Tomi Rask, a safety instructor of Helsinki’s Civil defence centre who was leading the tour of the bomb shelter, which can host up to 6,000 people. Rask said Finland first started to build an extensive network of bomb shelters in the 1960s, partly stemming from its experience of fighting the Soviet Union in the winter war of 1939. As the country has not seen any military action since 1945, the bomb shelters have been used as sports facilities, swimming pools, car parks and storage. But the defence strategy of Finland, which has a 1,340km (830-mile) border with Russia, has come under renewed focus since Moscow invaded Ukraine on 24 February, triggering the biggest geopolitical crisis in Europe since the second world war. Finland this week started discussions about joining the US-led Nato military alliance while its foreign minister told the Guardian his country had real concerns about the prospect of Russia using tactical nuclear weapons in Ukraine. “I don’t want to brag, but the Finnish bomb shelter technology is one of the best. We have been doing this for a while,” Rask said, pointing to the two massive steel doors at the entry of the shelter, that he said would withstand heavy bombardment – including nuclear – as well as chemical attacks.\nRask said all buildings in the country above a certain size had to have their own bomb shelters, estimating there were approximately 5,500 civil defence shelters with roughly 900,000 places in Helsinki alone, more than the capital’s population. “These shelters can protect against practically any bombing or chemical attacks. We have water, clean air and beds that can people going for weeks.” The shelter was maze-like, with different rooms popping into view as we walked through, including a cafeteria and a children’s playroom. “It was built like this on purpose,” Rask said, “Studies have shown that people react better to rooms that have walls, where there are boundaries that create a sense of privacy.” Rask’s face dropped when asked whether the events in Ukraine have impacted the work of the city’s civil defence, the unit responsible for looking after the shelters. “It’s sad to see what is happening in Ukraine. I see the poor people hiding in the metro or in theatres. It shows again how important it is what we do.” But the vast shelter network is just one of the components of what Finland calls its strategy of “comprehensive security” that has started to attract attention following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. For decades, the country has engaged with every level of society to prepare for the possibility of conflict with its neighbour, said Charly Salonius-Pasternak, a security expert at the Finnish Institute of International Affairs. “Russia is never specifically mentioned, but it has always been understood that the country should be prepared to make the threshold for a Russian attack as high as possible.” Finland, a country of 5.5 million people, can muster a wartime army of 280,000 personnel, while in total it has 900,000 trained reservists. Helsinki has maintained its high level of defence spending even as others cut in the 1990s and 2000s after the fall of the Soviet Union. The country recently announced it would replace its ageing combat jets with 64 F-35 planes and weapons systems in a deal worth £6.97bn. Salonius-Pasternak said it was “symbolic” that the country’s leadership pushed through with the pricy purchase of the jets just as the pandemic hit in 2020. “We had no idea at the beginning of the pandemic how bad it was going to get, what it will do to our economy. But then our prime minister came out and said that the deal will go ahead signalling that the country’s security is paramount.”\nFinland has also continued with conscription for all male school-leavers even after the end of the cold war when many other European nations ceased the practice. “It was a great bonding experience,” said Jon Lehtinen, 24, a student from Helsinki, who finished his year of service last year. “At the same time, it gives you a sense of social responsibility. We are a small nation and every pair of hands could one day be important.” But despite the countrywide efforts to bolster its security, Salonius-Pasternak stressed that Finland, which frequently ranks as one of the happiest countries in the world, was the opposite of a “militarised society”. “It is only natural you bring a rain jacket when there could be clouds.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T14:47:08Z'}, {'id': '62628a9c8f08c1667906cb89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than seven in 10 people in England have been infected with Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic, according to the Office for National Statistics. The estimate, the most detailed analysis to date, suggests 71% of people in England had caught Covid between 27 April 2020 and 11 February 2022. The proportion is likely to have risen further in the most recent Omicron wave, during which there was the highest prevalence at any time in the pandemic, including in older age groups that had previously had relatively low rates of infection. Prof James Naismith, the director of the Rosalind Franklin Institute at the University of Oxford, said: “The total number of infected people was rising rapidly when the data stopped. The bottom line is the majority of people in the UK have had Covid-19.” The analysis used a sample of 535,116 people who completed one or more tests as part of the UK coronavirus infection survey (CIS), which covers people over the age of two years living in private households.\nSlightly lower proportions of the population were estimated to have been infected in Wales (56%) and Scotland (52%), but the figures are not directly comparable as the data covered a shorter time period, with Welsh data starting in June 2020 and Scotland in September 2020. In Northern Ireland, 72% of the population were estimated to have been infected. Duncan Cook, the deputy director for the Covid-19 infection survey, said: “Today’s release is a valuable piece of the puzzle for understanding the impact of the pandemic across the UK.”\nThe analysis suggested that by October 2021, about one in three people in England had been infected and the proportion remained lower than a half until the emergence of the Omicron variant, which triggered a rapid rise in cases. The proportions infected are likely to be even higher than the ONS estimates as in the most recent Covid wave, which coincided with the lifting of restrictions, there was a surge in the number of cases in the oldest age groups. “In some regions of England today I would predict the portion of those who have had Covid-19 will easily exceed 80%,” said Naismith.\nThe findings come as the latest ONS survey shows Covid rates are continuing to fall across the UK, with about 3,218,700 people in England – one in 17 – having Covid in the week ending 16 April, down from about one in 15 the week before. Decreases were also seen in Wales (one in 15), Northern Ireland (one in 30) and Scotland (one in 19) and across all age groups.\n“We continue to see a welcome decrease in infections across England, Northern Ireland and Scotland in today’s data. For the first time in several weeks, we are also seeing a decrease in Wales too,” said Cook. “It’s encouraging to see that infections have decreased in all age groups across England. Despite the decrease in infections, it’s important to note that levels remain high. We continue to monitor these going forward.” According to the latest government figures, the number of Covid patients in hospital and the number of weekly deaths linked to Covid is also falling in the UK.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T14:08:18Z'}, {'id': '62611edf8f084c98f77b1532', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his late 70s, Albert Costa spent 10 days in a coma after a massive heart attack. When he woke up, one thing was clear: he would sell his life’s collection of books. There was a catch, however. Costa’s bookshop would not sell its products at their market value, but at a price he personally felt they were truly worth. Now 83, Costa trained first as an engineer and then as an anthropologist. He spent much of his life travelling around Africa and the Pacific acquiring artefacts for museums. He also became a compulsive book collector. What he did not want was for them to end up in a flea market where “no one knows the value of what is in them and they sell them all for one euro”. The solution was to open Espíritus del Agua (water spirits) in Gràcia, Barcelona, and stock it with his private collection of works on anthropology, art, philosophy and travel, as well as fiction. The tiny shop, crammed from floor to ceiling with books, takes its name from an exhibition about Inuit art that Costa helped organise in 2000 for Fundació La Caixa, the cultural organisation linked to one of Spain’s largest banks. “I sell books but it’s a business that barely pays the overheads,” he says. “I enjoy it because it’s a new career. But rather than sell them all to a library, I like people to come and look and then we can come to an agreement.”\nAt one point a customer enters the shop and browses for about 10 minutes, then leaves. “Has she gone?” asks Costa, who is profoundly deaf. “Oh well, she’s looked at the books. Books are for looking at too.” Pricing, he says, is a delicate issue. “Lots of people have this idea that secondhand books have no value but I believe a secondhand book should be only a little cheaper than a new one and sometimes much more expensive. I try to arrive at a price somewhere in the middle.\n“If people protest, I say, when you buy a secondhand car, you don’t know if it’s been well looked after and maintained. But you can see with a book that it’s all there, the author’s thoughts, the company that printed it.” He holds up a book. “This is a masterpiece of anthropology; the author dedicated his life to this work, but this book was on sale for €9 (£7.55). I’d ask €15 or €20. If people don’t want to pay that, it’s all the same to me. Unless it’s a student and I know they’re going to read it, then they can have it at any price.” Costa’s collection – and there are plenty more books at home, he says – represents a lifetime of travel and curiosity and must be hard to part with. “I know I can’t leave my son with 10,000 books in the house,” he says. “Of course, it hurts to sell them, but it’s a painful obligation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T12:59:01Z'}, {'id': '62621b5b8f084c98f77b1ef9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The nature guides are waiting outside a Taiwanese fried sausage shop on the outskirts of Taipei, easily identified by their quick-dry clothing, microphones, and laminated sheets of QR codes. They are also carrying several enlarged photos of insects. A group of about 50 excited people soon gathers, ready to start trudging up a nearby mountain in the dark. It is a ritual repeated across Taiwan at this time of year, as hundreds of thousands of people flock to more than 30 sites like this one, in Xindian. They gather in the hope of witnessing the twinkling lights of fireflies, a natural phenomenon that is beautiful, captivating, and under threat. The guides say they cannot guarantee the group will see any, but people are hopeful. The conditions are ideal: a last burst of winter gave up overnight and it’s clearand muggy. “If we see the fireflies, we’re lucky. If we don’t, we’re hiking,” says the guide. The lights the group is looking for are a firefly courtship routine lasting just two to four weeks, as males show off to potential mates by making their abdomens glow green or a warm red. As dusk settles the first of dozens of groups with dozens of people – from toddlers in prams to elderly couples – begin the 90-minute hike along the Hemeishan trail through an abandoned amusement park and into the jungle. On the walk up, observers rush to a ditch to marvel at the first sighting: just two or three fireflies hovering around the undergrowth. But by the time night has fallen and the walkers have stumbled their way to trail peak’s plateau, they are surrounded by blinking lights dancing over marshy ponds in the darkness.\nTaiwan is home to about 65 of the world’s estimated 2,200 species of firefly. In terms of density, it ranks behind only Jamaica and Costa Rica, with two species for every 1,000 square kilometre. But global populations are under threat from habitat destruction and pesticides, as well as water, air and light pollution. “The fundamental problem is visibility,” wrote Tufts University firefly experts, Avalon CS Owens and Sara Lewis, in the Conversation last year. “Fireflies use their bioluminescence to flirt in the dark. It doesn’t work so well with the lights on.” Climate change is also a concern, says Dr Wu Chia-Hsiung, an expert on fireflies from the National Taiwan University. “[Fireflies] like to hatch in a wet and humid area, so if climate change makes a place too dry [they won’t hatch].” He notes the Taiwan drought of 2020-21, its worst in 50 years. But conservationists and volunteers are fighting to save them.\nIn the centre of the Taipei, conservationists with the Friends of Daan Forest Park Foundation have successfully reintroduced fireflies after almost a century. In 2014, the group formed under Wu’s training to restore natural habitats, replace bright streetlights with firefly-friendly globes, and lead tour groups. Their success has led to delegations from Hong Kong, Singapore and Bangkok visiting to learn from them. They run the nightly tours during the season, with as many as 500 people on weekdays, and 1,000 at weekends. “It’s a childhood memory for those over 50, and before 2014 many of them thought it would be impossible to see them again,” says Wu. “We brought them back. It’s an ecological miracle.” There is massive community interest. A review of pre-pandemic firefly tourism estimated at least one million people travelled annually to sites across 12 countries to see the fireflies each year, including hundreds of thousands in Taiwan. Conservation groups and guides have worked to minimise the impact, limiting numbers and staggering start times for groups, and encourage people to stick to paths and not use torches, flash photography or wear insect spray.\nDozens of people on Hemei mountain are here for the tricky but rewarding photo opportunities. Betty, a retired woman from Taipei, has spent the evening sitting in a small camping chair next to a flat patch of long grass and ferns. Her iPhone stands on a short tripod, its screen displaying a frankly stunning photo taken using a slow shutter app. “It’s just like when people see shooting stars, you’re super-excited. This is only once a year and the time is very short.” In Daan Park, crowds gather in the twilight by the ecological ponds, drawn in by the foundation’s own firefly song – a tune in multiple languages written by winners of a competition with $600,000 in prize money. It plays on a loop. Energy and hopes are high: it’s another warm night and despite a growing Covid outbreak, the usually cautious people of Taipei have turned out in droves. Lou-ann Fu Yen-fen, a retired banker who has volunteered with the foundation for six years, says it’s been an honour to show people the fireflies in the city centre. “I believe in live and learn. For my generation, if we lived in the suburbs we saw the fireflies so naturally. We took it for granted. Young people live in the city and have never seen it before. If they learn to live in harmony with the environment they will treasure it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T15:16:14Z'}, {'id': '626263088f08c1667906c966', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The leaders of Germany, Spain and Portugal have publicly backed Emmanuel Macron in Sunday’s French presidential election runoff, calling on French voters to support “freedom, democracy and a stronger Europe” – and taking a swipe at Brexit. In a highly unusual intervention in another country’s election, Olaf Scholz, Pedro Sánchez and António Costa said in an op-ed column in the leading French daily Le Monde that France’s second-round vote was “for us, not an election like any other”. Although they did not mention Macron or his far-right rival Marine Le Pen by name, the centre-left German chancellor and Spanish and Portuguese prime ministers said they “hoped” the incumbent’s vision of “France, Europe and the world” would win. The vote was a choice between “a democratic candidate who believes France is stronger in a powerful and autonomous EU, and an extreme-right candidate who openly sides with those attacking our liberty and our democracy,” they said. The EU needed a France that remained “at the heart of the European project”, they said, continuing to “defend our common values” in a “strong and generous Europe”. “We hope the citizens of the French Republic will choose it.” A longstanding Eurosceptic, Le Pen, who, polls suggest, is trailing Macron two days before the deciding vote, has dropped her pledge in previous elections to abandon the euro and leave the EU. But much of her current platform would imply breaking EU and single market rules, experts say, leading to a “Frexit in all but name”. In a dig at Britain’s decision to leave the bloc, the three leaders said “Take back control” had been “the Brexiteers’ promise”, but that Brexit had instead “disrupted Britain’s transport and supply chains, caused a collapse in its foreign trade and seen inflation rates generally higher than in the eurozone.”\nThose in the UK who were supposed to be “the first beneficiaries of leaving the EU – workers, young people and the vulnerable – are those who have ultimately suffered the most,” they wrote. The leaders said the election outcome was crucial “for France and for all of us in Europe” because of Russia’s war on Ukraine. “Populists and the far right in all our countries have made Vladimir Putin an ideological and political model,” they wrote, referring to past admiring remarks by Le Pen about the Russian president. A spokesperson for Le Pen’s Rassemblement National (National Rally) said that outside interventions in elections were rarely welcomed by voters or effective, adding that there were other EU governments that shared her vision for an “alliance of sovereign nations”. An emotional appeal by Barack Obama to British voters not to back Brexit was widely criticised by Leave campaigners, with some suggesting the then US president’s remarks may have actually helped their cause.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T12:09:21Z'}, {'id': '626280fa8f084c98f77b2253', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain is to reopen its Kyiv embassy, Boris Johnson has announced, more than two months after moving it out of the Ukrainian capital before the Russian invasion. Since the embassy’s closure in February, the UK has retained a diplomatic presence in Ukraine, but has not been providing in-person consular assistance. The Foreign Office (FCDO) said at that time that the embassy was relocating temporarily and staff were operating from an embassy office in the western Ukrainian city of Lviv. However, the embassy is expected to reopen next week after Russian forces were pushed back or withdrawn from the region around Kyiv in the face of Ukrainian resistance. A team of diplomats returning will include Melinda Simmons, the UK ambassador. The announcement, which the prime minister made at a press conference in India, also comes after he met the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, during an unannounced visit to Kyiv earlier this month. “The extraordinary fortitude and success of President Zelenskiy in resisting Russian forces in Kyiv means I can announce that very shortly, next week, we will reopen our embassy in Ukraine’s capital city,” Johnson said at the beginning of the press conference in New Delhi. “I want to pay tribute to those British diplomats who remained in the region throughout this period.” More than a dozen European countries, as well as the European Union, have already reopened their missions in Kyiv. They include Italy, Spain and France, which reopened on 16 April. The French ambassador, Etienne de Poncins, said: “It was obviously a very moving moment for me and my colleagues. We left Kyiv seven weeks ago.” He said they did not know whether they would ever return. The Czechs returned on 13 April, announcing on Twitter: “This is one of the many steps we are taking to show our support for Ukraine.” Zelenskiy has praised states whose missions have returned to the capital, saying they are sending “a clear signal to the aggressor”. The US has been weighing up the possibility of reopening its embassy in Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-22T11:33:17Z'}]}