{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A humiliating process’: Ukrainians caught in red tape trying to reach UK relatives', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-14T06:00:02Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/14/a-humiliating-process-ukrainians-caught-in-red-tape-trying-to-reach-uk-relatives', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Refugees', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Amelia Gentleman', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ameliagentleman'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '622f063a8f08527b3685640b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A scheme giving offering Ukrainians home with “sponsors” in the UK has been opened and will provide refugees leave to remain for three years, and sponsors getting £350 a month. We would like to hear from people who have been paired with someone as part of the scheme. Why are you taking part and what has the application process been like for you? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-23T12:21:40Z'}, {'id': '622eea9d8f08d38fbc42d427', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People in the UK can offer to sponsor and house people fleeing the conflict in Ukraine who have obtained a visa through a new government scheme. So far, around 4,000 visas have been issued to Ukrainians with “tens of thousands” more expected to be provided, according to the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove. The first refugees to use the new route are expected to arrive in the UK by the end of the week, when they will be matched with people offering spaces in their homes. How will it work? What is the scheme? The “homes for Ukraine” programme allows individuals, charities, community groups and businesses across the UK to offer a room or home rent-free to Ukrainians escaping the war, regardless of whether they have ties to the country. Michael Gove described it as a “national effort” on behalf of those in desperate need. The scheme follows widespread criticism of the Home Office’s slow and bureaucratic approach to the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. How do you apply? The UK government has launched a website gathering expressions of interest from potential hosts. How many hosts are likely to get involved? Gove has said he is looking into taking in a Ukrainian refugee and the actor Benedict Cumberbatch said from the Baftas red carpet that he hoped to take part in the scheme. Asked whether he would take part, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said on Monday he was “starting to have a conversation with my wife about that,” but committed only to helping with the refugee crisis in some way. An Opinium poll for the Observer suggested that almost one in three Britons might be willing to invite a Ukrainian refugee to live with them: 9% said they would definitely do so, while 20% said they might. A previous community sponsorship scheme, largely aimed at welcoming Syrians, has proven relatively slow and bureaucratic with only about 700 individuals receiving such support since 2015. How long can refugees stay? Members of the public can nominate a Ukrainian individual or family to stay with them for at least six months. Sponsored Ukrainians will be granted three years’ leave to remain in the UK, and will be able to work, claim benefits and access public services during this period. Will security checks will be carried out? This has yet to be disclosed, but Gove has said steps will be taken to ensure hosts and refugees are prevented from “abusing” the new scheme. He said security checks would establish whether people “are who they say they are” and prevent the scheme “being exploited possibly by criminal elements,” noting that this “would only ever be a tiny minority.” The Home Office will also check that the people offering up their homes are in a position to provide that support. A spokesperson for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) said the charity did not want to see unnecessary barriers in the process, but added that “it is vital child protection is built into every stage of the government’s and local authorities’ response to this crisis.” The NSPCC urged the government to work with the foster communities, charities and other partners “to ensure the sponsorship scheme is safe.” Is there any compensation for hosts? People offering accommodation to Ukrainian refugees will receive a payment of £350 a month, though this does not increase for additional people. Gove has also said local authority areas will be entitled to more than £10,000 per Ukrainian refugee using this route to the UK. Additional payments will be available to support school-age children who need to be accommodated within the education system, he said. What have been some of the criticisms of the scheme? The Refugee Council says the UK is not being as welcoming as EU countries, which have waived visa requirements for Ukrainians in the short term. Its chief executive, Enver Solomon, told the Guardian the UK scheme was “effectively a managed migration route, which is not suitable to use to respond to a humanitarian crisis.” Solomon also said the programme should be only one part of Britain’s response to the crisis, and urged the government to introduce a properly resourced programme that would enable Ukrainians to live independently in the UK, including access to healthcare and housing benefits. Solomon and the NSPCC have also urged the government to put in place expert mental health support for hosts and guests, since many refugees will be suffering from trauma. “It’s a bit like asking people to become foster carers without having a social worker in place. There needs to be good quality specialist support otherwise it risks relationships breaking down,” Solomon said. There have been also concerns about the tight timeframe, with the NSPCC calling it an “ambitious turnaround.” Are Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland planning anything different? The first ministers of Scotland and Wales, Nicola Sturgeon and Mark Drakeford, have said that as well as taking part in the UK-wide scheme their nations are willing to become “super sponsors” for Ukrainian refugees to speed up the process and allow large numbers to come to the respective nations more quickly. Sturgeon has urged Westminster to waive all visa requirements for Ukrainian nationals trying to get into the UK, criticising the government’s approach so far as “beset with bureaucracy and red tape.” In Northern Ireland, the Executive Office has strongly encouraged expressions of interest, and these can be made through an online portal due to open on Monday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T08:24:55Z'}, {'id': '622b5f078f08d38fbc42bff9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A major new Biden administration initiative to facilitate access to Covid-19 antivirals will have a limited impact and fail to mitigate certain health inequities, major pharmacist groups argue, because pharmacists are restricted from prescribing the pills. Announced in Joe Biden’s State of the Union address, the “Test to Treat” program is meant to address the maddening difficulty Americans have had in accessing Covid-19 treatments. The administration will channel newly increasing stocks of antiviral pills to major retail pharmacies that have in-house clinics, providing one-stop testing and antivirals access. The program, which the administration aims to provide for free (in the face of fierce Republican opposition to new Covid-19 spending), is also slated to roll out in Veterans Affairs clinics, community health centers and long-term care facilities. Major participants include some 250 Walgreens stores, 225 Kroger Little Clinics and 1,200 CVS MinuteClinics. CVS clinics in particular are staffed by nurse practitioners and physician assistants, authorized by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to prescribe the two currently available Covid antivirals, Pfizer’s Paxlovid and Merck and Ridgeback Biotherapeutics’ molnupiravir. In a 9 March letter to Biden calling for pharmacists to be granted authority to prescribe these pills, 14 organizations representing pharmacies and pharmacists insisted Test to Treat’s impact will be compromised by the fact that such in-house clinics are relatively limited in number and largely in urban areas. “Unfortunately, rural and underserved communities are less likely to benefit from your test to treat approach because of this limitation,” the letter states. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 90% of Americans live within five miles of one of approximately 60,000 pharmacies. “The FDA is still blocking us from leveraging the most accessible healthcare provider out there to make sure that these patients can get these drugs easily,” said Michael Ganio, a Columbus, Ohio pharmacist, senior director of pharmacy practice and quality at the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, which is a signatory of the letter to Biden. “As far as expanding access,” said Ganio, Test to Treat is “not doing a lot”. The need for Covid-19 antivirals is likely to be greater in rural areas, at least on a per-capita basis. A recent CDC study found that through January, 58.5% of people aged five and older in rural counties had received at least one coronavirus vaccination shot, compared with 75.4% in urban counties. Paxlovid and molnupiravir are authorized for individuals at high risk of severe Covid-19, in particular unvaccinated people with certain medical conditions. Paxlovid was 88% effective at preventing hospitalization and death in its clinical trial. Molnupiravir proved just 30% effective. The FDA only authorizes its use when other treatments are unavailable or aren’t advised for an individual. Sufficient supply of Paxlovid will be key to Test to Treat. Since late December, the federal government has delivered a woefully inadequate 700,000 Paxlovid courses to states, the biweekly allotment increasing from 100,000 in January to 175,000 in March. The administration has claimed it will distribute 1m courses in March and 2.5m in April. A Pfizer representative would only state that the company plans to deliver a cumulative 10m courses by the end of June. The administration has agreed to purchase 20m courses, slated to be delivered by the end of September. In September 2021, the US Department of Health and Human Services amended a federal public health emergency law, the Prep Act, to grant licensed pharmacists the authority “to order and administer select Covid-19 therapeutics” – which at the time meant monoclonal antibodies and vaccines. But when the FDA authorized Paxlovid and molnupiravir in December, it explicitly restricted pharmacists from prescribing them. Authors of the letter to Biden say they submitted data to the FDA at the end of January, hoping to persuade it to grant pharmacists prescribing authority. These groups have also lobbied the federal government to ensure Medicare Part B would reimburse pharmacists for such prescribing – a move that would probably lead health insurers to follow. Prescribing Paxlovid safely can be challenging, because it may interact harmfully with other medications. Additionally, the FDA advises against providing the treatment to those with severe kidney or liver impairment. Experts have also raised concerns about molnupiravir’s potential toxicities. It cannot be prescribed to minors and is not advised for pregnant women. Chanapa Tantibanchachai, an FDA press officer, said the agency’s decision to forbid pharmacists from prescribing Paxlovid and molnupiravir “was based on several factors, including the drugs’ side-effect profiles, the need to assess potential for drug interactions, the need to assess potential kidney function problems (including the severity of potential problems), and the need to evaluate patients for pre-existing conditions” linked to severe Covid-19. Tantibanchachai said the FDA could revise the policy “as new data and information become available”. On 4 March, the American Medical Association said the “pharmacy based clinic component of the Test to Treat plan flaunts patient safety and risks significant negative health outcomes”. The AMA argued that by prescribing Covid antivirals at such clinics, providers may endanger patients for whom they lack a comprehensive medical history. The pharmacy groups insisted in their letter to Biden they have the expertise to prescribe these medications. In an email to the Guardian, Al Carter, executive director of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy, stated: “Pharmacists have more complete access to the patients’ medication in comparison to physicians, especially since most patients have more than one prescriber, who don’t necessarily talk with each other. “Pharmacists spend their whole education focused on medications and their impacts on the body; whereas physicians take the minimal number of classes on pharmacology.” Katherine Yang, a clinical pharmacist at the University of California, San Francisco, said: “There are a lot of studies that show that when you increase services in community pharmacies, you improve care. In a lot of neighborhoods and rural areas, people may not have access to primary care, and pharmacists are the most accessible public health provider the patients can see.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T13:24:42Z'}, {'id': '622de23d8f0806dde1f8d351', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Allies of the Ukrainian president, Voldymyr Zelenskiy, say Vladimir Putin will only accept a compromise on Ukraine’s future neutrality if he is facing a credible threat to his economic power base by a rapid and permanent exclusion of Russia’s oil and gas exports from its lucrative European markets. The Russian government receives 40% of its budget revenues from energy exports. But Ukraine is meeting stubborn resistance from Germany, which insists its economy would be plunged into recession if it suddenly lost access to Russian gas and oil.\nIn an interview reflecting the moral pressure Germany is under to do more, the country’s Green economics minister, Robert Habeck, admitted Europe in the past had fed Ukraine false promises, but said Germany could not afford “the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs” that a full energy embargo would require. He said Germany at best could be freed of Russian coal by the autumn, of its oil by the end of the year, but could set no date for ending German reliance on gas. The impasse is leaving senior allies of Zelenskiy feeling frustrated, and appealing to the UK and the US to use the G7 to try to persuade the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, to sign up to a western timetable to end dependence on Russian energy. Scholz and Emmanuel Macron, the French president, spoke with Putin again at the weekend. Zelenskiy’s chief negotiator, Mykhailo Podolyak, has said the talks between Ukraine and Russia are now virtually continuous, and have got past the stage of trading ultimatums. But the French sound less optimistic. Jean-Yves Le Drian, the French foreign minister, said: “We are in front of a wall. The worst is ahead of us. This war will be long.” The frustration with the German position is such that Zelenskiy is willing to turn to one of Scholz’s predecessors, Gerhard Schröder, to act as a mediator with Putin. The former chancellor has accepted the role, possibly to salvage something from the ruins of his reputation, and reportedly had talks with Putin last week. Some of Zelenskiy’s team are also uneasy at the intermediary role of the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, questioning the depth of Israel’s support. Zelenskiy has repeatedly stressed he is willing to meet Putin to discuss new security guarantees for Ukraine in return for his country’s future neutrality, either as an alternative to membership of Nato, or as an interim measure prior to joining the defence pact. ‘The hostile bacchanalia’ Speaking last week after his largely inconclusive talks with Sergei Lavrov in Turkey, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dymtro Kubela, said “the real issue for Ukraine is security guarantees and hard security guarantees, similar to the ones that members of Nato have. We need these guarantees primarily from Russia since it is the country that committed an act of aggression against us, but also from other countries including permanent members of the UN security council. The idea is that we have a treaty, an agreement where countries would oblige themselves not to commit aggression or put economic, or any other, pressure on us”. He confirmed the president had cooled down on Ukraine’s Nato application “because, despite our best efforts, Nato is not ready to integrate us. The reaction to the aggression by Nato has been to delegate to member states to deal with us on a bilateral basis.” But he added that until Ukraine knew the strength and reliability of the guarantees it was not yet ready to say the guarantees could be a substitute for Nato membership. “We are not yet in a position to abandon Nato membership”, he said. The idea is for a legally binding treaty signed by numerous countries that guarantees the security of Ukraine in a way that the Budapest Memorandum signed in 1994 failed to do. The memorandum was supposed to guarantee Ukraine’s independence in return for the country abandoning its nuclear stockpile. Britain, in the form of John Major, was one of the co-signatories. The memorandum in effect became a dead letter. Zelenskiy insists the talks are serious and no longer merely an exchange of ultimatums. The US, reflecting what it has been briefed to them by Israeli, French and Turkish intermediaries, all whom have spoken to Putin, say they have not heard any willingness by the Russian leader to compromise.\n“It’s hard to offer an overture when the Kremlin’s position continues to be that we’ll continue to pummel Ukraine until it bows to maximalist demands,” a senior US official said last week. Putin’s public position is still to demand the “demilitarisation and de-nazification” of Ukraine, in effect regime change, as well as Ukrainian recognition of Crimea and of the Donbas. He thinks he is winning, the White House judges. That leads the US and UK to argue the economic endurance test between the west and Russia must continue, and be intensified, until what Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov oddly describes as “the hostile bacchanalia” becomes so intense that Putin finds his inner circle desert him, or even assassinate him.\nBut Zelenskiy’s allies feel Scholz, a fortnight after Germany’s great “turning point” on defence spending, has reverted to cautious type. A delegation has been in Europe this week arguing the EU, now on its fourth sanction package, has still not taken the decisive step – a total embargo on Russian energy. Andriy Kobolyev, the former boss of Ukraine’s energy firm Naftogaz, and now spearheading an international push for comprehensive western energy sanctions on behalf of Zelenskiy, finds the German caution frustrating. He said: “Until European leaders understand Putin sees them as a weak and easy victims in his geopolitical strategy, he will continue doing what he is doing. That is why the only way to prove Putin wrong is to put on a full-scale energy embargo. Europe has to play a different game and say ‘we know we can cope without Russia’. It has to say ‘we are large economies, and with a different energy mix we can cope because for us it is a matter of principle’. It has to say ‘we are putting an end to this right now and you Russians will lose our market forever’. That poses an existential threat for Russia.” Putin’s ‘sacred cash cow’ Kobolyev has negotiated with Putin and his energy barons, and insists he knows their mindset. He believes the Russian president will face their wrath, and that of the FSB security service, if they feel Putin totally miscalculated not only Ukrainian resistance, but the west’s willingness to make the sacrifices to wean themselves off Russian energy, and so blow a massive long-term hole in the Russian budget. It would also upend all the assumptions of the Russian energy elite around Putin, such as Igor Sechin, the boss of Rosneft. Sechin, like Putin, is highly conservative on issues such as climate change. He remains convinced absolute oil consumption will increase by 10% by 2040 and by 20% in Asia. Kobolyev says it would be a complete shock to Sechin if his most profitable market just disappeared overnight. “Their sacred cash cow would have been killed.”\nSo far only the US has said it will end oil imports, but since the US imported an average of only 209,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil and 500,000 bpd of other petroleum products from Russia in 2021, it is hardly a great sacrifice. The UK has said it will join the embargo by the end of the year. But Scholz has set his face against the move. He said last week: “At the moment, Europe’s supply of energy for heat generation, mobility, power supply and industry cannot be secured in any other way. It is therefore of essential importance for the provision of public services and the daily lives of our citizens,” he added. Annalena Baerbock, the Green foreign minister, has said much the same. “If we end up in a situation where nurses and teachers are not coming to work, where we have no electricity for several days. Putin will have won part of the battle, because he will have plunged other countries into chaos.” Scholz was one of a group of leaders who insisted on the removal in an EU council statement of any reference to the proposed target date of 2027 for the EU to end its dependence on Russian gas. A game of geopolitical chess His concern is understandable. Oil accounts for 32% of German energy input, and one-third of that comes from Russia. Yet oil is central to Putin’s war machine. Thane Gustafson, the chronicler of Russia’s energy sector, points out in his latest book, Klimat, that in 2019, the last pre-pandemic year, income from oil – worth $188bn – accounted for 44% of Russian exports in value, and gas only 12%. Hydrocarbons generate 56% of Russia’s export income and 39% of the federal budget. Kobolyev is convinced that if the EU banned Russian oil, other sources could be found. “There is a Russian proverb: a sacred place is never empty for long”, he explains.\nIn a game of geopolitical chess with Russia, Biden is already working to find alternative oil supplies. For now he is trying to fill the shortfall through drawing on the US reserves, oil from Venezuela, the world largest oil producer, Iran and Saudi Arabia. White House officials were in Caracas for the first such talks in 20 years. Venezuela’s Nicolás Maduro government has signalled its willingness to cooperate with the White House by releasing two political prisoners in a goodwill gesture. Venezuela’s oil output could rise by at least 400,000 bpd, the country’s petroleum chamber said on Friday. But Biden has to tread carefully since the idea of reconciliation with Maduro is leading to a reaction in Congress. Difficult talks about Saudi Arabia boosting output are continuing, according to Kobolyev. But Saudi’s weekend execution of 81 “criminals and terrorists” hardly suggests the kingdom is desperately seeking the west’s approval. The executions hardly makes a mooted visit to Riyadh by Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, more likely. In the case of Iran, Russia has stepped in at the last minute to try to block Iran’s nuclear deal, fearing that an agreement, and the lifting of oil sanctions on Iran, would result in Tehran being able to unleash as much as 2m barrels of oil a day on to the global market. To turn to the autocrats of Venezuela, Iran and to Saudi Arabia, or the indeed the UAE, to save the west from Putin has its ironies, but some say needs must. If Paris was worth a mass, oil, it seems, is seen as worth some diplomatic humble pie.\nThe more complex issue is gas. As a compromise between those that favour a ban, such as Poland and the Baltic states, the EU has produced a plan by which the EU cuts its consumption of Russian gas by two-thirds before the end of 2022. The EU would then become independent from all Russian fossil fuels by 2027 or “well before 2030”. “By the end of this year, we can replace 100bn cubic metres [bcm] of gas imports from Russia. That is two-thirds of what we import from them”, the EU commission said in a statement. The EU argued it can receive about 10bcm more gas from alternative pipeline suppliers such as Norway and Azerbaijan. The main bulk of this replacement would, however, come from imported liquid natural gas, which officials estimate would need to reach 50bcm of additional imports by the end of 2022, possibly via a joint, strategic EU contract, although legal details remain to be resolved. Federico Santi, a gas specialist at the consultancy Eurasia Group, said: “That is a huge figure, equivalent to around 10% of global LNG consumption in 2021.” Even so, Kobolyev is unimpressed by the lack of ambition and the lack of specific measures. He insists the EU should at least cut off sales of Russian LNG, which hits the Yamal project, with ties to the Kremlin’s siloviki mafia. He has also proposed that the revenues from Gazprom’s pipelines go into an Iran-style escrow account that will be released only once Russia calls off the invasion. Sums might be deducted to pay for the reconstruction of Ukraine. He claims Russia could not physically turn off the gas taps immediately, taking Europe through to next winter.\nKobolyev is no longer a lonely voice, but is finding influential support in Germany in a way that is starting to discomfort the “traffic light-coalition” government. Norbert Rottgen the CDU former chair of the Bundestag foreign affairs committee, is calling for a full ban, and says he is not sure what happened to Germany’s turning point. He says polls show voters are ahead of their leaders in being prepared to make economic sacrifices to stop funding Putin’s war machine. On 8 March, the Leopoldina National Academy of Science, and separately a group of nine international economists, mapped out how Germany could absorb an embargo, with the worst scenario a 3% fall in GDP – less than 4% impact of Covid – or probably something like a cost of €1,200 per German citizen.\nThis figure is contested, including by Habeck, who says the impact is more likely to be 5%. Various economists, lobbyists and gas intensive industries, such as chemicals, are staking out their ground in a heated debate that blends morality, politics and economic modelling. Scholz has moved under pressure in this war once, over arms sales, Nord Stream 2 and defence spending, and there is no guarantee he will not again. But if frozen out of European markets, would Putin simply turn to China? Kobolyev says no. “The option of shifting gas sales to Chinese markets is not possible,” he says. “In the case of China it might take 10 to 15 years to build the infrastructure. The existing pipeline to China is small and is not connected to the areas currently supplying Europe. “Although exporting LNG and oil will be easier, China will know they are his last market, meaning he will lose 80% of his revenues and that is a devastating blow.” “This is about more than cents and dollars. Putin is paranoid and he would hate to become dependent on China because he is afraid China will eat them alive. Russians perceive China as their smaller brother. Russians brought communism to China, but this will be a humiliation. “So when Putin goes back to his crony friends – and this is the close KGB circle – and he tells them ‘Look guys, we have been thrown out of Europe completely, but I am trying to negotiate with China’, they are not going to appreciate that. To lose your biggest most lucrative market, to lose 80% of your revenues and become fully dependent on China, that does not look like a very smart or strategic move. That does not look like a victory. “The Russians and Putin”, he explains, “have always believed Europe can never survive without Russian oil. He thinks if he wins in Ukraine, the Kremlin will be forgiven because there is no alternative and the west is weak. That is how he thinks, it’s how Gazprom thinks and it’s how Rosneft thinks. That is how they see the world. That is why Putin personally controls the energy trade. It is his sacred cash cow.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T15:21:05Z'}, {'id': '622ef4568f08d38fbc42d454', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin will be “held responsible” for war crimes in Ukraine at the international criminal court in The Hague, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, has pledged, saying the UK would help gather the necessary evidence. The justice secretary, Dominic Raab, was travelling to The Hague on Monday to help make sure that “when that prosecution comes, the court will have what it needs,” Javid told BBC One’s Breakfast programme. Javid was asked for his response to the news that a pregnant woman shown in a much-used photograph being stretchered out of a bombed maternity hospital in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol had reportedly since died, as had her baby.\n“It fills me with rage to see something like that. These are appalling atrocities committed on innocent civilians in Ukraine by the Russians,” Javid said, saying the World Health Organization had documented 31 attacks so far on health facilities. “These are war crimes and Putin will be held responsible,” he added. Asked how, Javid said: “He will be ultimately held responsible for sure by the international court. Today, the justice secretary, my colleague, is going to The Hague and he’ll be meeting there with the chief prosecutor and others, offering UK support to gather evidence.” Asked about potential Nato support for Ukraine, Javid stressed that the alliance was a “defensive organisation,” but warned of consequences for Russia if Nato nations were targeted, after strikes close to the Polish border. “If a single Russia toecap steps into Nato territory it will be considered an act of war,” Javid said. Overnight, Javid’s department announced that 21 Ukrainian children who have cancer had arrived in England with immediate family members to have NHS treatment. “They will now be cared for here in the UK for as long as is needed,” Javid said. “To do this it was quite an operation over the weekend. A number of partners were involved, and I’m very grateful to them, especially the Polish government and the NHS. And I’m pleased that we can provide support in this way.” Asked if more such patients would come, Javid said the UK was “working with international partners,” and that another aspect was to support Poland and Moldova. The government is expected to announce details of a scheme later on Monday by which Britons can host Ukrainian refugees arriving in the UK in their homes for six months. Asked about concerns raised from some refugees about the ability to carry out enough checks in the time provided, Javid said: “This is an unprecedented situation, and I think that it’s important to listen to charities that have experience, and help work out how this can work. “But I don’t think the fact we haven’t done this before should be some kind of block on not trying to do this in this way at this point. I think it is very valuable for a Ukrainian refugee arriving in the UK to have a British host to help them in so many ways, not least to integrate into British life.” Asked if he would consider hosting a refugee, Javid said he was “starting to have a conversation with my wife about that,” but did not commit to doing so.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T00:53:17Z'}, {'id': '622ed9638f08ec6557dfcc50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia and the Netherlands have launched legal proceedings against Russia through the International Civil Aviation Organization for the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17. The legal action could compel Russia to take part in stalled negotiations with the two countries, and could also result in it being penalised by the United Nations-linked organisation which is responsible for the administration of international aviation law. Australia and the Netherlands have been seeking compensation and an apology from the Russian Federation for the MH17 disaster that saw 298 people, including 38 Australians, killed when it was shot down over Ukraine in 2014.\nHowever, Russia, which has denied involvement despite the findings of an international investigation, unilaterally withdrew from negotiations with the two countries in October 2020. Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, and attorney general, Michaelia Cash, announced on Monday that Australia would be launching joint action with the Netherlands under Article 84 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation, and will allege that Russia is in breach of the Chicago Convention that underpins aviation law. “We have maintained since May 2018 that the Russian Federation is responsible under international law for the downing of flight MH17,” Payne said in a statement ahead of Monday evening’s announcement in Sydney. “Today’s joint action by Australia and the Netherlands is a major step forward in both countries’ fight for truth, justice and accountability for this horrific act of violence.” “The Russian Federation’s refusal to take responsibility for its role in the downing of flight MH17 is unacceptable and the Australian government has always said that it will not exclude any legal options in our pursuit of justice.” Australia and the Netherlands will rely on what they say is the “overwhelming evidence” that the flight was shot down by a Russian Buk-Telar surface-to-air missile system, which was transported from Russia to an agricultural field in the east of Ukraine on the morning of 17 July 2014. At the time the area was under the control of Russian-backed separatists. The two countries will also present evidence that the missile system belonged to the Russian Federation’s 53rd anti-aircraft military brigade, and was accompanied by a trained Russian military crew. Only the trained Russian crew of the Buk-Telar, or someone acting under their instruction, direction or control could have launched the missile system, which was returned to the Russian Federation shortly after the downing of flight MH17. The legal action is in addition to the Dutch national prosecution of four suspects for their individual criminal responsibility in the downing of the flight: three Russians, Igor Girkin, Sergey Dubinskiy, Oleg Pulatov, and a Ukrainian, Leonid Kharchenko. An international investigation found that the men did not “push the button” on the missile system themselves, but had brought the anti-aircraft system to eastern Ukraine and were the link between the Moscow-backed separatist Donetsk People’s Republic and Russia. In the statement, Payne said the Russian Federation needed to be held to account for its breaches of international law, particularly in light of the invasion of Ukraine. “Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified invasion of Ukraine and the escalation of its aggression underscores the need to continue our enduring efforts to hold Russia to account for its blatant violation of international law and the UN charter, including threats to Ukraine’s sovereignty and airspace,” Payne said. “While we cannot take away the grief of those whose loved ones died as a result of Russia’s actions, the Australian government will pursue every available avenue to ensure Russia is held to account so that this horrific act never happens again.” At a press conference in Sydney, Payne told reporters Australia could “consider” withdrawing the action if Russia is “prepared to return to [the] negotiating table … but we have seen no sign of good faith from Russia on that for some time.” Australia and the Netherlands informed the Russian Federation in 2018 that the two countries held Russia responsible under international law for its role in the bringing down of MH17, despite the Kremlin’s repeated denials. Australia’s then foreign minister, Julie Bishop, at the time called on Russia to “enter into negotiations to open up a dialogue about its conduct and to seek reparations” for the families affected.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T23:21:18Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: Ukraine sees signs of hope in talks Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this morning. Diplomatic efforts to end the war in Ukraine are stepping up with talks between the Kyiv government and Russia set to resume today. The negotiations come after a deadly Russian missile attack on a Ukrainian military base near the Polish border heightened fears about an escalating conflict and as bombing resumed in Kyiv this morning. Although the Biden administration again rejected calls from Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy for a Nato-enforced no-fly zone, his negotiators think there is some hope that Russia is “beginning to talk constructively”. In another diplomatic initiative today, the US and China will meet amid concern that Beijing could supply arms to Putin’s war machine. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, will meet his Chinese counterpart, Yang Jiechi, in the Italian capital amid reports that Russia has asked China for weapons to bolster its faltering invasion of Ukraine.\nThe human cost of the war was brought home yesterday as Ukraine announced that at least 1,300 of its soldiers have been killed so far. The horrors of the conflict have been described by Ukrainians who managed to escape westwards, accusing the Russians of shooting people dead in the street as they advance through towns and villages. Tributes have been paid to the American journalist Brent Renaud, who has been killed in Ukraine, apparently by Russian fire. The Kremlin has reportedly urged Russian media to use clips of US Fox News host Tucker Carlson on their shows because he has been critical of the US response to the war. The US faces a standoff with Saudi Arabia and the UAE over their refusal to pump more oil and bring prices down to ease pressure on western economies. Brent crude is down 3% to $109.37 this morning. A Russian default on its debts after western sanctions is not “improbable” but would not trigger a global financial crisis, the head of the International Monetary Fund said. You can follow all the day’s developments in Ukraine at our live blog, and catch up with what we know so far. * * * Refugee delays – British families trying to help Ukrainian relatives get to safety in the UK have expressed frustration at continued bureaucratic delays, despite government promises to cut the red tape involved in the family reunification scheme. One woman stuck in Budapest with her elderly parents said it was a “humiliating process”. Another refugee problem is brewing as Belarus pushes asylum seekers from the Middle East into Ukraine, according to people in Belarusian camps. The refugees became trapped in Belarus after they were promised passage to the EU to cross the border last year. * * * Covid warning – Ministers have been accused of “turning off the headlights at the first sign of dawn” after scrapping nationwide Covid surveillance programmes, with scientists saying it will almost certainly end up costing more money in the long run. It comes as growing numbers of new infections in multiple countries led one expert to prompt speculation that Europe could be at the start of a sixth wave of Covid infections, partly driven by the “stealth” BA.2 Omicron variant. China’s government has responded to a sharp rise in coronavirus infections by shutting down Shenzhen, a huge city of 17.5 million people. It is two years since coronavirus hit the US, leaving nearly a million people dead. But as it counts the cost, is the country ready for another pandemic? * * * Every dog has its day – The Power of the Dog, Jane Campion’s western starring Benedict Cumberbatch as a rancher in 1920s Montana, has taken the best film and best director prizes at the Baftas in London. Will Smith took the best actor statuette for King Richard and best actress was awarded to Joanna Scanlan for After Love. The Guardian documentary The Black Cop, about a former Metropolitan police officer who explores his memories of homophobia, racial profiling and racial harassment, won the Bafta for best short film. Climate protesters tried to disrupt proceedings, but Rebel Wilson ruffled enough feathers with a series of filthy jokes and 85-year-old Shirley Bassey opened the show by singing Diamonds Are Forever to mark 60 years of Bond films. And you can check out the frills and fluff of the red carpet here.\n* * * Inflation crisis – The poorest households in the UK could see their cost of living jump by as much as 10% by this autumn if Russia’s invasion of Ukraine leads to a prolonged conflict, the Resolution Foundation thinktank has warned. Higher food and energy prices could drive inflation above 8% in the autumn, it warns, hitting poorer families disproportionately harder. Tenants could see a big increase in rent and bills, with research showing typical costs set to rise £1,000 this year. * * * Bright spot – The UK’s first solar farm owned by a health board and linked directly to a hospital has exceeded expectations by providing all the electricity needed to run the site on some days. Bosses hoped the farm in south-west Wales would supply Morriston hospital in Swansea with a fifth of its energy but it provided enough energy over one 50-hour period to meet 100% of the hospital’s demands. Today in Focus podcast If confirmed by the US Senate, Ketanji Brown Jackson will be the first Black woman to take a seat on the country’s highest court. The New York University law professor Melissa Murray explains the significance of Jackson’s nomination.\nLunchtime read: ‘I’ll never grow up’ – Lisa McGee\nLisa McGee wowed the world with her sitcom Derry Girls but now she’s tackling poverty in a series of monologues for the BBC called Skint. She tells Zoe Williams about the childhood that inspired her, the breaks that got her into TV – and the barriers that keep so many out. Sport Thomas Tuchel said he would not quit before the end of the season after Chelsea put their uncertain situation to one side and beat Newcastle United thanks to a brilliant goal from Kai Havertz. Andriy Yarmolenko broke down in tears after setting West Ham on their way to a 2-1 victory over Aston Villa. Chelsea were able to do what they needed to in their pursuit of Arsenal in the WSL, thanks to a 92nd‑minute goal from the talismanic Sam Kerr. Eddie Jones believes England can exploit the pressure facing grand slam-chasing France this weekend, insisting his side have already found the winning formula against Les Bleus. Jones has questioned why Ireland were not shown a yellow card as a result of England’s scrum dominance in his side’s 32-15 loss but believes the gallant defeat – in which they played 78 minutes with 14 men – could be the making of their 2023 World Cup campaign. Emma Raducanu’s time at Indian Wells came to an end yesterday as she was defeated 6-7 (3), 6-4, 7-5 by Petra Martic of Croatia in the third round of the BNP Paribas Open. And Joe Root’s continuation as England Test captain may be in part down to a lack of alternatives but the interim head coach, Paul Collingwood, has spoken of a “real unity” being formed under the Yorkshireman. England’s women are in action in the World Cup and have South Africa chasing 236 to win. You can follow the action here. Business The boss of BrewDog, James Watt, hired private investigators to obtain information about people whom he believed were taking part in a smear campaign against him. According to multiple sources, investigators approached people to gather evidence about those who he appeared to believe had maligned him. The brewer says investigators were hired to find the source of false allegations about Watt and as a result of those investigations its lawyers “are pursuing a private criminal prosecution for fraud and malicious communications”. On the markets, shares in China and Hong Kong are down sharply over Covid concerns, but FTSE100 futures are up 0.24%. The pound is down at $1.301 and €1.193. The papers\nThe Russian missile attack on Yavoriv and the implicit threat to Nato is the lead in most papers. “Russia escalates war in Ukraine with attack close to Nato border”, says the Guardian, and the FT has “Russian strike at western Ukraine base sends warning signal to Nato”. “War reaches Nato border” says the Times, and the Telegraph goes for “US warns Putin as he takes war to the West”. The i leads with “Putin strikes bring war to door of Nato”, while the Mirror has a picture of the Russian leader and the headline “The west in his sights…”. The Sun has “Putin blitz on Nato border”. The Mail says “Putin’s deadly warning to the west” and the Express goes with “Putin’s missile strike brings war to Nato’s border”. There’s an interesting angle in the Scotsman, which reports “Farmers warn Ukraine crisis and inflation could lead to food shortages”. Sign up\nThe Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T06:27:45Z'}, {'id': '622ecd648f08ec6557dfcc11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Controversial rules on hairstyles and underwear are to be scrapped at high schools run by the Tokyo metropolitan government, after pressure from students. Almost 200 public high schools and other educational institutions will drop five regulations, including one requiring students to have black hair, from April, the Mainichi Shimbun said, citing official sources. The newspaper said rules designating the colour of students’ underwear and a ban on the “two block” hairstyle – short at the back and sides and longer on top – will also be dropped.\nThe move comes after a survey carried out last year of 240 schools in the capital found that 216 retained regulations that an increasing number of people in education – including the children themselves – say are outdated. Some of the rules will stay in certain schools, however. While some will abolish a requirement for students to show proof that their hair is naturally curly or a colour other than black, some will keep the regulation, reportedly at the request of students and parents. Yuto Kitamura, a member of the Tokyo metropolitan board of education, said the decision to scrap the most egregious regulations was a “major step forward,” according the Mainichi. Another member, Kaori Yamaguchi, praised the move but said it had taken too long to address students’ grievances. “Japanese people have been taught to believe that it is a virtue to simply abide by the rules,” she said. “I hope this will be an opportunity for people to discuss what we should do to create a society where rules are observed in a way that’s acceptable to everyone.” The debate over strict dress codes intensified several years ago after a high school student, then aged 18, sued education authorities in Osaka after her school had told her to dye her naturally brown hair black or face exclusion. Last year, the Osaka district court rejected her claim that she had been forced to dye her hair, but said the removal of her desk and name from the roster after she stopped attending classes had been unreasonable. It ordered the board of education to pay her ¥330,000 [£2,152] in compensation. Last year, all public high schools in Mie, a prefecture in western Japan, abolished rules governing hairstyles, underwear colour and dating, with local officials conceding that the requirements were “relics” from a different age. Some schools had told students they must wear undershirts in beige, mocha or other colours that were not easily visible beneath their uniforms, while only “monotone white, grey, navy blue or black” underwear was permissible. Some students have successfully campaigned for girls to be allowed to wear trousers to school, while others have called for a lifting of bans on makeup and hair products.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T23:24:10Z'}, {'id': '622e29d98f08ec6557dfc88b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'British families trying to help Ukrainian relatives get to safety in the UK have expressed frustration and fury at the continued bureaucratic and technical hurdles involved, despite government promises to cut the red tape involved in the family reunification scheme. Applicants said they were struggling with a range of problems – such as online application forms that crash, difficulty in getting clear guidance from helpline staff, some advice hotlines charging premium rates of 69p a minute, delays in visa processing times and extended, expensive stays in hotels in unfamiliar countries with no clarity about when visas will be granted. Although the rules governing the Home Office-administered Ukraine family scheme are to change from Tuesday, removing the need for applicants to get fingerprinted before coming to the UK, about 22,000 people who have already submitted applications have been given no information about how to proceed. Several families with elderly and vulnerable relatives told the Guardian that they were concerned about the protracted delays in processing UK visas. Anna Malyna White, an interpreter from Glasgow, was attempting to bring her parents, Viacheslav Malyna, 84, and Zhanna Malyna, 82, to the UK. Both are retired civil engineers from Kharkiv, with serious health conditions, but despite attempts to flag the urgency of their situation to Home Office staff, all three have been stuck in a hotel outside Budapest since last week, unclear about whether they will need to wait until 28 March, for a scheduled biometric appointment, or if the changing rules will allow the family to travel to the UK sooner.\nMalyna White visited the Budapest visa application centre on Thursday to try to get clarity. “Employees are stressed. Some looked on the verge of a nervous breakdown,” she said. She was frustrated that the government had cited security concerns as its justification for putting applicants through a protracted checks. “My parents have been traveling to Britain to see their granddaughter for 16 years, they’ve had several multiple entry visas, they’re already in the Home Office system and they pose no threat to anyone. It is such a humiliating process.” She added: “These are people who have already fled 900 kilometres in a car, without food or water or a change of clothes. They’re running out of their medication, which we can’t get here without a prescription – and now they have to wait for clearance. It makes no sense.” Her father, Viacheslav Malyna, said: “The rules change so often and we still have no idea when we will actually get a visa. We feel very disappointed – not just from a moral point of view, but also because we’re not rich people. We can’t afford to stay on in a hotel because it is very costly.” The Home Office is to make it clear on Tuesday that those who have biometric appointments arranged later in the month no longer need to attend them, but will just need to upload their Ukrainian passports on to a website, and then wait for their applications to be processed – but applicants have not yet been informed that this is the revised procedure. Other applicants said that the processing time, even once the biometric tests have been done, is already taking longer than officials guidance suggests. Musician Robin Jax submitted an application on 4 March for his Ukrainian wife, Miroslava, and his mother-in-law Hanna Tkachenko, who uses a wheelchair. They met in Warsaw after she had fled Ukraine alongside about 2,000 people on a train designed for 560 passengers. Jax organised a visa appointment last Monday, where they gave fingerprints and were told that the application would probably be processed sometime after 24 hours and within five days. They are still waiting for confirmation that the visa has been granted.\n“Every UK Visas and Immigration member of staff I speak to is very compassionate, but they are caught by the fact that the policy is changing faster than they can answer our questions and we’re just stuck in limbo, waiting,” he said, adding that he was dismayed to be asked to give his bank details when he contacted a UKVI helpline, and charged 69p a minute for the call duration. “The system is set up against people who have had to leave their homes in the worst circumstances imaginable. I don’t think the UK response has been particularly humanitarian.” Lawyer Rosie Schumm has spent the weekend trying to make applications on behalf of her mother’s Ukrainian cousins, but she found that the website crashed when she tried to input information.\nShe said: “The system is impenetrable and extremely complicated for me to use, even as a lawyer and with English as my first language. It took me four hours to complete and, after asking me to provide the most ridiculous number of documents, guided me to an outsourced page for making appointments in a biometric centre in Moldova – which has no available appointments whatsoever.” The Home Office was unable to give average times for visa processing. A government spokesperson said: “We have expanded our Visa Application Capacity to 13,000 a week, deployed additional staff across the EU, with a 24/7 helpline in place to ensure those who need appointments can get them to come here. This allows us to balance security risks while welcoming those in need.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T00:29:12Z'}, {'id': '622a40f78f08ec6557dfb122', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It has been just over two years since Donald Trump declared a national emergency in the face of the coronavirus pandemic that was rapidly spreading across the United States – and the rest of the world. Now, even as Covid-19 remains a threat, US public health officials and researchers are looking to the next potential pandemic – whether it’s influenza, another coronavirus, antimicrobial resistance, or a different health threat entirely – as they hope to build on the progress and avoid the pitfalls of the past two years. Knowledge of how respiratory viruses work – and how to battle them – has increased exponentially during this outbreak. But at the same time, misinformation about infectious diseases, especially vaccines and treatments, has multiplied, presenting new challenges.\nScientists, several of whom have advised Joe Biden, recently released a 136-page “roadmap” for moving from Covid crisis to what they term the “next normal”. These investments include supporting health workers and strengthening health systems, as well as supporting survivors with long-term symptoms. A new disease forecasting center, the Center for Forecasting and Outbreak Analytics, will become part of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), aiming to prepare for the next big outbreak. And a new bill with strong bipartisan support would create a 9/11-style commission to investigate the Covid response and learn from it. But the US was already thought to be prepared for the next pandemic – in fact, in November 2019, the US was ranked first among 195 countries for pandemic preparedness. Even so, the US response has been plagued by failures, including politicization, lack of trust, the individualization of health, and widespread inequality. And one key reason for the failure may have to do with something that would seem completely unrelated to public health. Trust – or a lack of it – played a major role in the pandemic’s scope, according to recent research that examined infection and fatality rates in 177 countries. The researchers sought potential connections to democracy, universal healthcare, hospital beds, quality of health services, and economic inequality. “We were not able to observe a connection between any of those things and how countries actually did,” said Thomas Bollyky, lead author of the study and the director of the global health program at the Council on Foreign Relations. Only one factor seemed to matter: trust in leaders and in one another. Building trust can play a critical role in preparing for the next pandemic, along with improving data collection and sharing, biomedical advances like vaccines and treatments, and low-tech solutions, like improving ventilation and wearing high-quality masks during respiratory outbreaks. Making such changes can strengthen a country’s pandemic response even in the midst of an outbreak. The Ebola outbreak that began in 2014 suffered, at first, from a poor response that prolonged the epidemic. People refused to allow health workers into their homes, or refused to go to clinics, because they were scared of what a diagnosis would mean. Local leaders promoted miracle cures, some of which were poisonous. As clinical trials for an Ebola vaccine ramped up, it was difficult to find volunteers because of skepticism or outright hostility toward first responders. But then, the response turned a corner – and Bollyky credits the U-turn to steady efforts to build confidence in officials, neighbors and other countries.\nNational governments and other organizations held parades of Ebola survivors to boost confidence in getting tested, seeking treatment and recovering successfully. Local youth leaders, religious leaders and other community representatives encouraged participation in the vaccine clinical trials. Anthropologists worked with community representatives to develop burial practices that honored tradition while being less likely to spread the virus. And it was successful, helping end the largest, deadliest outbreak of Ebola. Applying these same lessons could bring Covid to heel – and it could help prevent or address the next big one, which could be even more dangerous. “In some ways, we were lucky with this pandemic, which is an odd thing to say. But the fact of the matter is, a future virus or novel influenza could certainly be more transmissible and more virulent,” Bollyky said. And all of the investments America makes in preparing for the next big one will help address Covid as well, experts said. “You’re using your present response to start to develop the behaviors, investments and infrastructure in order to be able to do the same response in a future crisis,” Bollyky said. Ventilation and air filtration are among those important infrastructure investments, said Rick Bright, chief executive of the Pandemic Prevention Institute at the Rockefeller Foundation and a former official for the US Department of Health and Human Services. “It’s really important for us to continue our investments in upgrading our air filtration systems in public buildings, restaurants, bars, transportation hubs, airplanes, airports, schools – reminding people of the importance of ventilation and filtration, and also being ready and able to be willing to wear the mask when we have high levels of virus prevalent in our community.” The development of vaccines and treatments, especially those built on quickly customizable platforms over the past two years, can play another critical role in responding to the next pandemic. Before Covid, the previous record for developing a vaccine was four years. It took 326 days to create and authorize a Covid mRNA vaccine, followed quickly by several more vaccines put into use around the globe. “That’s remarkably fast, and we also produced it at a greater scale than we’ve ever seen before,” Bollyky said. Most of the Covid vaccines are built on platforms that can be changed relatively quickly when new variants or viruses emerge – a very promising development that could change vaccinations for evolving and emerging pathogens. Technology under development could mean immunizations happen not with needles and syringes but simple skin patches, like Band-Aids, Bright said. New investments need to be made in the worldwide delivery of vaccines, both in terms of shipping and storing vaccines and educating people about the benefits of vaccination – and those investments will persist for the next outbreak, experts said. “Our only hope in future pandemics is to contain outbreaks closer to their source,” Bollyky said. “It is in our economic, moral and humanitarian interest to do something about the undervaccination that exists globally.” Improving faith in health officials and institutions could also prevent growing hesitations around vaccines, Bollyky said. With Covid, “we’ve unfortunately gone the wrong direction” and a new system of misinformation and disinformation could be mobilized in future pandemics as well – a worrying trend that needs to be addressed. While confidence has declined in the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and state governors, it has remained high in health workers, faith leaders and other community representatives, who can help guide current and future pandemic responses. Some of the mistrust is probably driven by vast inequities in American society, Bollyky said. “Addressing the sources of economic, social and political alienation in populations seems like the right place to start – in itself a good thing to do, and it does help start to address the long-term trust deficit. And what the pandemic has shown is, our lives depend on that.“ Vaccines and treatments are also most effective the earlier they can be used – which means data collection and sharing is key during a crisis. “To make them more effective, you have to use them sooner in the game … and the only way to do that was to have an earlier warning signal” of emerging viruses, Bright said. A persistent lack of these early warning systems “has always been this achilles heel in every pandemic we’ve seen in the past,” he said. “Going into this pandemic, we pretty much relied on a nose swab to get the information we needed to get, to know where the virus was spreading and how it was changing or evolving,” Bright said. That’s more expensive and slower than other signals, like wastewater monitoring. It also relies on individual behavior, which can be a difficult metric when some people are resistant to getting tested or don’t realize they are sick.\nWarning signs can instead be discovered through wastewater surveillance of pathogens like Covid, influenza and drug-resistant bacteria, for instance. The modern world is “a mosaic of signals”, Bright said. Changes in patterns – new illnesses cropping up in clinics, environmental changes to water and air, satellite images tracking new animal migration patterns – can then prompt epidemiologists to look for outbreaks more quickly and effectively. “What worries me is that we ignore the signal,” Bright said. It’s also important to share this information across borders – and not to penalize other countries with travel bans, as several nations did when South Africa and Botswana sounded the alarm on the Omicron variant. “In some cases, those restrictions actually hindered their ability to get the materials to keep surveilling the outbreak of the new variant,” Bollyky said. The next Covid variant is probably evolving or spreading now, Bright said. “I’m concerned, as we dial down more testing and more surveillance, that it’s going to turn the lights off on that battlefield and we’re not going to be able to see this variant as clearly and as quickly,” he said. “Many people think the pandemic is behind us and it’s over,” Bright said. But “anything and everything we do to prepare for the next surge will make us better for the next pathogen as well.” The biggest risk is forgetting or ignoring the hard-won lessons on Covid and other disease outbreaks, Bright said. “We always seem to get through them and then forget. We forget how bad it was, we forget how expensive it was, we forget how disruptive it was, and life goes back to normal. And then we don’t continue to invest in the innovation and technologies that got us through that crisis. And then the next pandemic comes along, and we’re not ready again and we’re starting from scratch.” But right now, he said, “we have an opportunity in the United States and around the world to continue funding, not let our foot off the gas, and drive these innovations.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-11T19:21:54Z'}]}