{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A battle in our souls’: women who fled Ukraine agonise over when to return', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-08T13:12:24Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/08/a-battle-in-our-souls-women-fled-ukraine-agonise-when-return', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Refugees', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees'}, {'tagTitle': 'Poland', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hungary', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Shaun Walker', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaun-walker'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '62f1408d8f08adcf60a3272f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Officials in Canada’s easternmost province have issued a state of emergency as crews battle the worst wildfires the region has experienced in more than half a century. Sprawling blazes have consumed thousands of hectares of forest in Newfoundland and Labrador over the last two weeks and remain out of control. “Over the last 36 hours, things have changed,” Premier Andrew Furey told reporters on Sunday. “We were predicting that we could manage this. However with the wind change, we are afraid that there will be significant smoke impact … This is a dynamic, evolving situation as all fires are, but we can’t wait for the last minute – we have to act now.” Furey said his government issued the state of emergency “not to create panic” but to ensure the province was able to better manage the quickly changing situation. Fires have been burning for close to two weeks in central Newfoundland, aided by strong winds. The Paradise Lake fire is estimated to be more than 6,500 hectares (16,062 acres) and the Bay d’Espoir fire is more than 5,000 hectares (12,355 acres). Large wildfires are relatively rare in the Atlantic province. But a summer of dry, intense heat has left its forests vulnerable to immense and fast-moving blazes. Craig Coady, department of natural resources incident commander, told reporters that crews had witnessed “extreme fire behaviour” in recent days that worried officials. “We expect to see that continue for today and possibly for the next few days. This is due to the high winds and low humidity.” Coady said heavy smoke was complicating efforts at combating the blazes. “If the [water] bombers can’t see ahead of the fire and it’s too smoky, it’s not safe for them to operate,” he said, adding that poor air quality was also the largest problem for residents nearby. The province has not yet ordered any evacuations, but officials have said they are prepared to order residents to leave any communities at risk. Canadian military personnel would be deployed to help with evacuation efforts, the federal emergency preparedness minister, Bill Blair, tweeted Sunday. The province also expanded its outdoor fire ban, which now prohibits the setting of fires on or within 300 metres of forestland. The move is necessary to help reduce the likelihood new fires are created by accident or through negligence. “Last night I saw two people throwing cigarette butts and I thought that was absolutely crazy,” Derrick Bragg, fisheries, forestry and agriculture minister, told reporters. “That is reckless and we do not need it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T18:01:11Z'}, {'id': '62f135798f08adcf60a326b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dozens of kimono-clad mourners have gathered to pay tribute to the world jiu-jitsu champion Leandro Lo after he was shot dead in São Paulo in a crime that has shocked Brazil. The 33-year-old fighter, who won eight world championship titles and is considered one of the sport’s greatest ever practitioners, was pronounced dead on Sunday after being shot in the head at a nightclub in Brazil’s biggest city. On Monday friends and admirers, including the celebrity chef Alex Atala, reportedly attended Lo’s wake at a cemetery in São Paulo’s south, before his burial. “He was a reference in the sport,” said the jiu-jitsu fighter Marcela Lima, who was among those to turn out dressed in her kimono, to the Folha de São Paulo newspaper. The victim’s mother, Fátima Lo, paid tribute to her “hero” on social media, writing: “You made me feel like the most loved mum in the world … I will miss you forever.” On Sunday night more than 40 members of the jiu-jitsu community surrounded a nearby police station to demand that the military police officer accused of killing Lo be brought to justice. The officer, named as Henrique Otavio Oliveira Velozo, reportedly shot the jiu-jitsu champion once in the face after an altercation at a concert being given by Grupo Pixote, one of Brazil’s most famous samba pop groups. The killing has sparked a major outcry and served, for some, as a reminder of the increasingly aggressive atmosphere that has gripped Brazil in recent years, as well a warning about the dangers of the soaring number of firearms being bought. Since Brazil’s pro-gun far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, took office in 2019 Brazilian gun laws have been relaxed dramatically and gun ownership has exploded, with more than a million weapons reportedly going into circulation. “Bolsonaro’s Brazil has become the wild west and nothing about this is a coincidence,” wrote the journalist Milly Lacombe. The news presenter and commentator Flávio Fachel tweeted: “Guns... unpreparedness... violence... crime... death.” Social media posts suggest Lo’s alleged killer, who was arrested after handing himself into police on Sunday night, was a die-hard gun aficionado. “Firearms abolish the tyranny of the strongest and protect the integrity of the weakest,” he wrote on Instagram recently alongside a photograph of him posing with a revolver at a shooting range.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T18:06:56Z'}, {'id': '62f12caf8f08b2ca242c77d7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Greek prime minister has attempted to douse a wiretapping scandal engulfing his government, claiming he had no idea the country’s socialist party leader was being monitored by intelligence services reporting directly to him. In an address to the nation on Monday, Kyriakos Mitsotakis described the phone tapping of the Pasok party chief, Nikos Androulakis, as a mistake that should never have occurred. “What was done may have been in accordance with the letter of the law but it was wrong,” Mitsotakis said. “I did not know and obviously I would never have allowed it.” The eavesdropping took place over a three-month period last year when the newly revitalised centre-left Pasok, Greece’s third-largest political force, was preparing to elect a new leader. Androulakis, a 43-year-old MEP, had been favoured to win the race. As the revelations came to light, with the Mediterranean nation’s spy chief and Mitsotakis’s most trusted aide resigning over the affair, officials in the centre-right government were reported as saying that the wiretaps had been ordered by the Ukrainian and Armenian intelligence services. The social democrat’s sensitive role on the European parliament’s foreign affairs committee, which deals with China, was cited. But the prime minister, facing his toughest hour in office since assuming power in July 2019, emphasised that while the surveillance had been approved by a senior prosecutor, as required by law, it was “politically unacceptable”. “In our democracy shadows cannot be allowed to exist and that is why I want to speak to you openly about recent developments,” he told Greeks at the start of the near seven-minute long address. “Although everything took place legally, the National Intelligence Service, EYP, underestimated the political dimension of this particular action. It was … politically unacceptable.” Greece’s political scene has been profoundly shaken by a scandal that the leftist opposition has wasted no time in likening to Watergate. Androulakis, who has called for a parliamentary investigation into the matter, expressed dismay that the Greek government had resorted to the “dark practices” last employed by the colonels who seized power in 1967, throwing the country into seven years of military rule. “I will continue to fight so that justice, the Greek parliament and European institutions will bring all the truth to light,” the Pasok leader tweeted, saying the eavesdropping had humiliated and exposed Greece internationally. European parliament sources, signalling the scandal is far from over, have said the affair will almost certainly be taken up when the 705-seat chamber returns from its summer recess. Androulakis, an MEP since 2014, claims the Strasbourg-based organisation’s cybersecurity unit has enough evidence to prove that attempts were made to monitor his mobile phone using Predator malware. An EU member state wiretapping a Euro MP would be seen as particularly egregious. The Greek government spokesperson, Ioannis Oikonomou, insisted on Monday that Athens had never used the “notorious malware” and that the “legal” surveillance of Androulakis had been conducted with “conventional means”. Mitsotakis, who faces re-election next year, took control of EYP within weeks of assuming office. Amid mounting calls for his resignation many described his effort at damage control as being too little too late. “Apart from being a liar he came across as arrogant and without remorse,” the main opposition Syriza party said in a statement, adding that it beggared belief that senior government figures had previously denied the wiretapping had ever occurred. Opposition politicians pointed to the fierce denials of both the Ukrainian and Armenian ambassadors to Athens as further proof that the administration had not come clean. The diplomats have reacted with outrage to suggestions that their countries had requested the wiretaps with Kyiv’s envoy, Sergii Shutenko, describing the claims as being “divorced from reality”. The Armenian ambassador, Tigran Mkrtchyan, went further, calling the allegation “a shameless lie”. “Armenia has never asked any government to wiretap anyone’s phone,” he said.\nAnalysts voiced surprise at the absence of any attempt to explain why Androulakis had been monitored at all, although he was not alone. Before the Pasok leader went public with the Predator claims – lodging a complaint with supreme court prosecutors in Athens on 26 July – two Greek journalists had also taken legal action following digital evidence that they, too, had been spied on by an administration that has faced accusations internationally of attempting to limit press freedoms. “It was a speech that left many questions unanswered,” said Lamprini Rori, assistant professor of political analysis at Athens University. “Yes, Mitsotakis accepted that it was a mistake but public opinion and the political elite wanted to know why Androulakis was monitored in the first place and that was never addressed.” The scandal was undoubtedly a blow for the Greek prime minister, who had taken pride in being supported by centrists at the last election. “The crisis will cost the government that part of the electorate,” said Rori. “Centrist voters will find it hard to trust [Mitsotakis’s party] New Democracy after this.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T17:08:31Z'}, {'id': '4cbd5abd-abc2-49d9-8786-a58c9483aedc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN secretary general has called for international inspectors to be given access to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant after Ukraine and Russia traded accusations over the shelling of Europe’s largest atomic plant at the weekend. “Any attack to a nuclear plant is a suicidal thing,” António Guterres told a news conference in Japan on Monday, two days after attending the Hiroshima peace memorial ceremony to commemorate the 77th anniversary of the world’s first atomic bombing. Guterres said the International Atomic Energy Agency needed access to the plant. “We fully support the IAEA in all their efforts in relation to create the conditions of stabilisation of the plant,” he said. Ukraine said renewed Russian shelling on Saturday had damaged three radiation sensors and hurt a worker at the Zaporizhzhia power plant, the second hit in consecutive days on the site. Ukraine’s ambassador to the IAEA, Yevhenii Tsymbaliuk, echoed the call for international inspectors and said Russian forces were attempting to cause electricity blackouts in southern Ukraine by shelling the plant, which was captured by Russian forces in early March but is still run by Ukrainian technicians. He said Zaporizhzhia staff were “working under the barrels of Russian guns”.\nPetro Kotin, the head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom, said the creation of a demilitarised zone around the site and the presence of peacekeepers “would resolve this problem”. He warned of the danger of shells hitting containers of highly radioactive spent nuclear fuel. If two or more containers were to be broken, “it is impossible to assess the scale” of the resulting disaster. “Such insane actions could leave to the situation spiralling out of control and it will be a Fukushima or Chornobyl,” Kotin said. In a televised address on Sunday the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, accused Russia of waging “nuclear terror” that warranted more international sanctions, this time on Moscow’s nuclear sector. “There is no such nation in the world that could feel safe when a terrorist state fires at a nuclear plant,” Zelenskiy said. Russian-installed authorities in the area said Ukrainian forces hit the site with a multiple rocket launcher, damaging administrative buildings and an area near a storage facility. The Russian embassy in Washington also released a statement itemising the damage. “Ukrainian nationalists launched an artillery strike on the territory of the specified object on 5 August. Two high-voltage power lines and a water pipeline were damaged as a result of the shelling. Only thanks to the effective and timely actions of the Russian military in covering the nuclear power facility, its critical infrastructure was not affected,” the embassy said.\nThe head of Zaporizhzhia’s occupying authorities, Evgeniy Balitskyi, said Ukrainian forces were to blame and had “decided to put the whole of Europe on the brink of a nuclear catastrophe” by shelling the plant. Ukraine says Russia has turned the plant into a military base, making it extremely hard to target the Russian troops and equipment inside. According to the New York Times, Russia has been using the plant as cover from which to fire on Ukrainian forces since mid-July. The Washington-based thinktank the Institute for the Study of War (ISW) assessed on 3 August that Russian forces were likely to be using the power plant to “play on western fears of a nuclear disaster in Ukraine in an effort to degrade western will to provide military support to a Ukrainian counteroffensive”. The ISW further said that Russia was “effectively using the plant as a nuclear shield to prevent Ukrainian strikes on Russian forces and equipment”.\nIt has not been possible to independently determine which side was responsible for the attack on the power station. The IAEA chief, Rafael Mariano Grossi, warned on Saturday that the latest attack “underlines the very real risk of a nuclear disaster”. In other developments on Monday: The Russian-installed leader of the Zaporizhzhia region signed a decree allowing for a referendum on joining Russia to take place. The Russian state news agency Ria Novosti reported that the declaration was signed at a conference of 700 regional officials where all present unanimously raised their hands in support of the referendum. In his video address on Sunday night Zelenskiy warned about “pseudo referendums” in the occupied south of Ukraine. He told Russia that choosing that path would close down “any possibility of negotiations with Ukraine and the free world”. Ukrainian forces again shelled Antonivskyi Bridge in the Russian-controlled city of Kherson, damaging construction equipment and delaying its reopening, Interfax news agency quoted a local Russian-appointed official as saying. Two more ships, carrying corn and soya beans, departed from Ukrainian Black Sea ports, Turkey and Ukraine said, taking the total to 10 since the first ship sailed last week under a deal with Russia to unblock Ukrainian grain exports. The United Nations and Turkey brokered the agreement last month after warnings the halt in grain shipments caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could lead to severe food shortages and even outbreaks of famine in parts of the world. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said if Russia were allowed to bully Ukraine, invade and take its territory, “then it’s going to be open season, not just in Europe but around the world”. One of Vladimir Putin’s closest allies has claimed the west wants to destroy Russia. Dmitry Medvedev, a former Russian president, who is now the virulently anti-western deputy head of the country’s security council, was speaking to the news agency Tass on the 14th anniversary of Russia’s invasion of Georgia. He linked the wars in Georgia and Ukraine as “one conspiracy aimed against Russia”. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T16:31:55Z'}, {'id': '62f11ba18f08b2ca242c7707', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian-installed head of the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region signed a decree on Monday providing for a referendum on joining Russia, in the latest sign that Moscow is moving ahead with its plans to annex seized Ukrainian territory. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has ruled out any peace talks with Russia if the country proceeds with referendums in the occupied areas. Yevgeny Balitsky, the head of the pro-Russia administration in the region, announced the decision to kickstart the process during a pro-Moscow forum entitled “We are with Russia” organised in Melitopol, the largest city controlled by Russia in Zaporizhzhia. “I am signing the order for the central election committee to start the preparations for holding a referendum on the reunification of the Zaporizhzhia region with the Russian Federation,” Balitsky said. Roughly two-thirds of Zaporizhzhia is under Russian occupation, part of a swathe of southern Ukraine that Moscow captured early in the war, including most of the neighbouring Kherson region, where Russian officials have also discussed plans for a referendum.\nRussia-appointed officials in Zaporizhzhia earlier said that the administration planned to proceed with a referendum even if Russia did not gain control over the entire region. Zaporizhzhia city is still held by Ukraine. Ukraine and its western allies have said that any referendums held under Russian occupation would be illegal and their results fraudulent. In 2014, Moscow and its proxies carried out a widely condemned referendum in Crimea, weeks after its forces seized the peninsula. On Sunday, Zelenskiy said peace talks with Russia would be impossible if the country proceeded with such votes in the occupied areas. “Our country’s position remains what it always has been. We will give up nothing of what is ours,” Zelenskiy said in his nightly address to the nation. “If the occupiers proceed along the path of pseudo-referendums they will close for themselves any chance of talks with Ukraine and the free world, which the Russian side will clearly need at some point. Balitsky on Monday gave no further details about the timing of the referendum. Bloomberg, citing two unnamed sources familiar with Moscow’s strategy, earlier reported that the Kremlin was aiming to conduct the referendums by 15 September. Kremlin-appointed officials in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia had already instigated a number of measures aimed at bringing the occupied regions closer to Russia and setting the stage for a future referendum. Earlier this summer, the Russian occupation authorities had started to hand out Russian passports to locals in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. Moscow has also forced Ukrainian teachers in occupied territories to follow the Russian curriculum, while “We are with Russia” billboards have sprung up across occupied cities. In a move further signalling Moscow’s intentions, the pro-Russian authorities in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia have set up local “elections committees” that are to be responsible for running the referendums. President Vladimir Putin initially denied that Moscow was seeking to occupy new land when Russia launched its invasion of Ukraine on 24 February. However, he has since made a string of statements in which he sought to justify what he portrayed as Russia’s historic quests to win back Russian lands. Last month, Russia’s minister of foreign affairs, Sergei Lavrov, said that Moscow had expanded its war aims in Ukraine, saying they now extended to Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. The Kremlin has also repeatedly hinted that it would recognise the referendums held in the seized Ukrainian territories, which would present the opportunity for Putin to declare the conquered areas as Russian territory.\nUkraine, boosted by western weapons, has vowed to mount a major counteroffensive in the country’s south. However, the annexation of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia could complicate Ukraine’s attempts to recapture the areas: if annexed by Moscow, the territories would be protected by the country’s nuclear arsenal. Speaking to the BBC on Monday, the retired British general Sir Richard Barrons said that a successful Ukrainian counteroffensive launched in the southern regions annexed by Moscow would raise the prospect of Russia using “small nuclear weapons”. “Ukraine would now be pushing into territory that Russia has declared as Russia, and at that point doctrinally and probably politically, Russia will start to reach for its tactical, its small nuclear weapons,” Barrons said, adding that those weapons would have a radius of “roughly two miles”. “We need to think through that and not regard it as some sort of terrible surprise that is completely unthinkable,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T15:51:39Z'}, {'id': '62f04b158f08cf33fef37134', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova has accused Ukraine of taking “Europe hostage” over the situation at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The plant is occupied by Russian forces, and each side has claimed the other has caused damage to the complex by shelling it. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been seeking to inspect it. Zakharova said: “The leaders of the United Nations and the IAEA, over and over again, do not dare to directly name the source of the threat. They are demonstrating their unwillingness to point the finger at Kyiv.” Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy called for new international sanctions on Moscow for “nuclear terror”. The UN nuclear watchdog has called for an immediate end to all military action near the plant after it was hit by shelling on Saturday night, causing one of the reactors to shut down and creating a “very real risk of a nuclear disaster”. The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station is operating normally according to reports from Yevgeniy Balitsky, head of the Russian-installed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region. The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom called for the plant to be made a military-free zone, and said there should be a team of peacekeepers present at the site. Ukraine conducted long-range strikes on Russian troop bases and two key bridges across the Dnieper River overnight. The strikes hit the only two crossings Russia has to the pocket of southern Ukrainian territory it has occupied on the western bank of the river, said Natalia Humeniuk, spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command. “The results are rather respectable, hits on the Antonivskyi and Kakhovskyi bridges,” she said on television. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the pro-Russian administration imposed on occupied Kherson told Interfax “The equipment of the builders who are repairing the Antonivskiy Bridge burned down, there are no critical damages. But the opening of the bridge is slightly delayed.” A Ukrainian court has sentenced a Russian soldier to 10 years in jail after finding him guilty of violating the laws and customs of war by firing a tank at a multi-story apartment block, an interior ministry official said. Ukraine has received its first three Gepard self-propelled anti-aircraft systems from Germany and will use them to defend important infrastructure facilities, the southern military command has said. The Russian-installed head of southern Ukraine’s occupied Zaporizhzhia region signed on Monday a decree providing for a referendum on joining Russia. Zelenskiy said on Sunday that there could be no talks with Russia if it proceeds with referendums in occupied areas of Ukraine on joining Russia. Russian forces now hold large areas of territory in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region. Four ships carrying Ukrainian foodstuffs sailed from Ukrainian Black Sea ports on Sunday. Pope Francis welcomed the departure of the ships carrying grain from Ukrainian Black Sea ports saying this could be a model for dialogue to bring an end to the war in Ukraine. Two more grain carrying ships have sailed from Ukraine’s Black sea ports on Monday, and the Polarnet, carrying 12,000 tons of Ukrainian corn, has arrived in Turkey. Russia is strengthening its positions and numbers on Ukraine’s southern front to ready itself for a Ukrainian counteroffensive and is likely to be preparing the ground to attack, according to British and Ukrainian military authorities. “Russian troops are almost certainly amassing in the south, either waiting for a Ukrainian counteroffensive or preparing to attack. Long convoys of Russian military trucks, tanks, artillery and other things continue to move from the Donbas to the south-west,” the UK’s defence ministry said. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said if Russia were allowed to bully Ukraine, to invade and take territory without being opposed, then it would be “open season” around the world. The US’s top diplomat was speaking at a news conference alongside South Africa’s foreign minister, Naledi Pandor. Pandor said no one in South Africa supported the war in Ukraine but that the prescripts of international law were not being applied evenly. “We should be equally concerned at what is happening to the people of Palestine, as we are with what is happening to the people of Ukraine,” she said. Russian shelling was recorded on Saturday in dozens of towns along the eastern and southern frontlines, according to the Ukrainian military. It also said Russian forces attempted to conduct assault in six different areas in the eastern Donetsk region, all of which failed to gain any territory and were held back by Ukrainian forces. Ukraine is investigating almost 26,000 suspected war crime cases committed since Russia’s invasion in February and has charged 135 people, its chief war crimes prosecutor told Reuters. Of those charged, approximately 15 are in Ukrainian custody and the remaining 120 remain at large. Finland has registered a record number of asylum seekers following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, beating a previous high set during the 2015 migrant crisis. Human rights group Amnesty International apologised for the “distress and anger” caused by a report that accused Ukraine of endangering civilians. The apology comes after Amnesty’s Ukraine head Oksana Pokalchuk said that she was resigning as she opposed the report’s publication, saying the human rights group unwittingly “created material that sounded like support for Russian narratives of the invasion”. UK defence secretary Ben Wallace welcomed a decision by Sweden to join countries contributing to the UK-led program to train Ukrainian personnel in the UK.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T15:15:25Z'}, {'id': '62f0eca68f08b2ca242c74ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Anti-racism activists who secretly filmed private beaches on the Côte d’Azur are planning legal action claiming discrimination on the French Riviera. SOS-Racisme sent couples of different ethnic backgrounds to exclusive coastal hotspots and used hidden cameras to record how each was received. One couple described as being of “north African appearance” who requested sun loungers were told they were all reserved. A few minutes later a white couple who made the same request on the same private beach were given loungers in the first row near the sea. Other activists say they were unable to make a reservation for sunbeds on private beaches if they gave a name that sounded foreign. “With an African-sounding name, the place was full. When I rang back and gave a French name, strangely enough there were still places,” one told Le Monde. SOS-Racisme has carried out similar undercover operations to highlight discrimination since the 1990s. It claims one-third of private beaches at Juan-les-Pins and Antibes are discriminating unlawfully and two-thirds of nightclubs and bars tested in Marseille and Aix-en-Provence are operating an illegal selection of customers based on their origins. “We have found discrimination can be based on clothing, the colour of skin, the physical appearance and the origin of the person. It’s unfair and intolerable living like this,” Karima Es-slimani, of SOS Racisme Nice, told France 3 television after the beach test. The organisation says it is building up a file to submit to lawyers. “We’re working with pro-bono lawyers who need lots of details in order to take legal action against these places. They will also use this information to draw up annual reports outlining discrimination by area,” Paula Cornette of SOS Racisme added. “This situation is the result of a clear failure of the public authorities in outlawing racial discrimination,” Dominique Sopo, the president of SOS Racisme, told journalists. He said the organisations’ findings would be sent the police and local authorities. “We will be watching closely to see what legal action follows,” Sopo added. SOS-Racisme did not name the private establishments it had visited in Juan-les-Pins and Antibes. The local tourist office and Antibes town hall have been approached for a comment.\nA report by the National Consultative Committee for Human Rights (CNCDH) on racism in France, published last month, claimed French society was becoming more tolerant. It placed the annual “tolerance index” at 68 out of 100, the highest ever, according to the committee’s secretary general, Magali Lafourcade. However, it reported that prejudice against certain communities – including Muslims and Roma – was still of particular concern. The CNCDH says an estimated 1.2 million people are victims of racially motivated aggression every year in France, while there are only 1,000 convictions in the court for reported offences, often due to the reluctance of victims to report attacks to the police. “We see there is a failure of institutions to realise this is a criminal problem,” Lafourcade said. “If there were many complaints, many legal actions and many convictions, we might hope the incidents would drop,” she added. • This article was amended on 9 August 2022 to remove the incorrect statement that this was the first time SOS-Racisme had investigated private beaches on the Riviera.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T14:24:53Z'}, {'id': '62e5462a8f08730a1f7f447f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Natalia Kompaniets spends her days running over a dilemma with her daughter as they sit in their temporary new home, a simply furnished room on the first floor of an unmarked building, in a nondescript suburb of Budapest. “Every day we think, should we go back or not? There’s a battle in our souls,” said Kompaniets, a 51-year-old who left the town of Obukhiv outside Kyiv in early March, along with her daughter and young granddaughter. Here, as well as elsewhere in Hungary, Poland and other countries neighbouring Ukraine, hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian refugees – mostly women, children and elderly people – are weighing up similar questions. If they are from a relatively safe part of Ukraine, is it time to return? Should they wait for the war to end? And how long would that mean waiting? A recent survey of Ukrainian refugees in seven countries by the United Nations high commissioner for refugees found that while most wanted to return to Ukraine eventually, only 16% planned to do so imminently. In the coming months, life is likely to get more difficult for many Ukrainian refugees, as the initial outpouring of goodwill across Europe wears off, and more people are forced to fend for themselves when it comes to food and accommodation. But for many, those struggles are still preferable to a return to an uncertain situation at home. “The main thing keeping a lot of people here is their children. Yes, the kids are pulled out of their normal lives here, but at least they can sleep normally and eat normally,” said Olena Nikolaenko, a 39-year-old from Kyiv who moved to Warsaw early in the war.\nNikolaenko now works for Future For Ukraine, a newly registered foundation based out of an office in a Warsaw skyscraper and entirely run by Ukrainian women. Part of its work is aimed at sending aid back into Ukraine, but another part is to provide support for refugees in Poland. Soon, the foundation will organise a series of lectures aimed at coping with the psychological burden of living abroad during wartime for Ukrainian women in Warsaw. “People are here with their kids, but without husbands, without parents, and often without money or work,” she said. “They are in this situation where it’s impossible to make plans.” Kompaniets and her family decided to leave Budapest and return home in June, but then a missile hit a nearby town and they put their plans on hold. The new plan is to wait until Ukrainian independence day, on 24 August, when they fear Vladimir Putin may launch symbolic attacks on Ukraine. If that date passes peacefully, they will return, in time for the granddaughter to begin her first year in school on 1 September. “Every day my conscience is crying out that we are sitting here, I want to get back home and help out in any way I can,” said Kompaniets. The family is staying in a safe house run by Hungarian Interchurch Aid, a charity. It was originally meant as a shelter for victims of domestic violence, but since March one floor has been reserved for Ukrainian refugees. Further down the corridor is the room of 30-year-old Vasilina Mikityuk, who left the city of Zhytomyr with her three-year-old son in early March. She spent a week staying with a family in Poland, before she arrived in Budapest planning to take a flight to Baku, Azerbaijan, where the father of her son lives. But she did not have a Covid vaccination and so was turned away at the gate. Stuck at the airport, she met volunteers who helped her find the shelter, and she has now been living there for four months. She does not want to move again, explaining that the uncertainty of war has caused severe panic attacks. “I need stability,” she said. However, it will not be easy for her to build a new life abroad. She does not speak English or Hungarian, and has only been offered long shifts doing manual labour in warehouses, or cleaning hotels, which do not seem compatible with looking after her son. She has already spent most her savings. But she said she cannot return home while there is still the possibility of Russian missile attacks.\n“I don’t want my child to be traumatised, I don’t want to go back while there are still sirens and while it’s still dangerous. I know what it means to be traumatised as a child. It stays with you for ever,” she said. The air raid sirens that sound frequently across Ukraine to warn of possible missile attacks are mentioned by many parents as traumatising for their children. Tatiana, a 32-year-old from Zaporizhzhia who is also living at the Budapest safe house, said even after several months abroad, the sirens remain her six-year-old son’s abiding memory of the war. “He says he only wants to go home if there are no sirens. We will have to decide in August,” she said. She came to Budapest because a friend was working there as a builder, and allowed her and her son to stay in a house he was renovating. But when the renovations were complete they had to move out and are now staying in the shelter. She is worried about staying in Hungary and is unsure if she can find work there. But she is also worried about returning to Zaporizhzhia, a city close to the frontline in eastern Ukraine. “People are saying you can hear the booms in Zaporizhzhia now. I’m scared of it turning into Mariupol,” said Tatiana.\nIn Warsaw, the Future for Ukraine foundation has grown swiftly and is raising hundreds of thousands of euros a month. The women running it say throwing themselves into the work is a way to take their minds off their personal situations, and to help Ukraine so all Ukrainians can return home soon. “The main goal of what we are doing is to help us all to be able to go back sooner,” said Rehina Koshova, a 35-year-old public relations professional, who also works for the foundation. Like most Ukrainians, her life has completely changed since February, when she took her daughter and headed for the border. “I called my husband and said ‘I’m already in Hungary’, and he said ‘I’m already in the army,’” she recalled. They have not seen each other since. The day she spoke to the Guardian, her husband had just called her to say he was heading for another trip to the frontline.\n“We all have trauma, there is just different levels of it. Now, we live in two universes. We are here and it seems as if everything is fine, then you look at the news and you see everything in your country. It’s a very difficult psychological state to deal with,” she said. Some have taken to obsessively scrolling through news from Ukraine, trying to gauge when their home towns may be more or less safe and they can go back. Others take the opposite strategy, avoiding all news from home to stay calmer. For Mikityuk in Budapest, the unpredictability of events has led her to put her faith in the guidance of a superior force. “The war has made me more religious. I try not to plan too much and rely on God to help me find the way and tell me what to do,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T21:02:05Z'}, {'id': '62f0eb8a8f080e23bc39e7e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN has called for international inspectors to be given access to the nuclear power plant in Zaporizhzhia, Ukraine, after it was shelled at the weekend. But how dangerous is the situation and what is likely to happen next? Why is the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant important? The plant, built in the Soviet era, is the largest nuclear reactor in Europe. Its six pressurised water reactors (of which at least two are currently operating) are important to Kyiv as they can produce power for up to 4m homes. Situated on the south bank of the Dnieper river at Enerhodar, south-west of the city of Zaporizhzhia itself, the plant occupies an extremely important strategic position both for Russian and Ukrainian forces, who have been contesting control of the site since early in the war. The presence of the water-cooled reactors, as well as a spent fuel storage facility, on the large and sprawling site has led Russia to use it as a so called “sheltered” artillery park, using the facilities to fire on Ukrainian positions in the belief that Ukraine would not fire back and risk a nuclear accident.\nThe US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has accused the Russians of using the plant as a “nuclear shield” saying: “Of course the Ukrainians cannot fire back lest there be a terrible accident involving the nuclear plant.” That has allowed Russia to target areas like the city of Nikopol across the river which has come under heavy shelling in recent weeks.\nWhy is there renewed concern? There are two issues fuelling a deepening anxiety over the situation at the plant, which is under Russian control but uses Ukrainian staff. International nuclear safety officials have become concerned over the lack of spare parts, access for routine maintenance of the reactors and lack of contact with staff all of which have been disrupted by the ongoing conflict. A second issue is grad missile fire around the plant at the weekend, with Russians and Ukrainians pointing the finger over responsibility. According to Energoatom – the Ukrainian nuclear authority – the impacts were close to the spent fuel storage area with the operator claiming Russian troops “aimed specifically” at the containers despite the presence of Russian troops at the site. However, it is worth noting that Ukrainian officials at times have somewhat overstated claims about nuclear risks posed by the conflict both at Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia – so for now it is not clear how dangerous this weekend’s incident was in and of itself. While Ukraine’s objective – to see the plant treated as a demilitarised area – is an entirely prudent call it would also serve a military objective by denying Russian forces the use of a plant from which they can shell with relative impunity. A final dimension is a claim by Ukrainian intelligence – reported in Ukrainian media outlets – that Russia has mined facilities, quoting the head of the radiation, chemical and biological defence troops of the Russian armed forces, Maj Gen Valery Vasiliev, who now commands the Zaporizhzhia garrison, saying: “There will be either Russian land or a scorched desert.” However, a major and deliberate detonation in Zaporizhzhia would threaten southern Russia as well as Ukraine with nuclear contamination, so it is important to distinguish between “nuclear blackmail” and a serious threat that would have repercussions for Russia itself.\nSo how dangerous is shelling around the plant? The reactors are designed to withstand substantial impact – think of a civilian airliner crashing into them – protected with steel and reinforced concrete as well as fire protection systems, although a strike from a substantial missile might be more problematic. The buildings housing the spent fuel, however, are not built with a similar level of protection, meaning that a release of spent fuel material is probably a greater risk from fighting than a catastrophic breach of a reactor, although more limited. The reality is that the situation at the plant in terms of safety operations is probably the most serious issue, as a deteriorating safety regime caused by the conflict has been exacerbated by a risk of a strike. The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Mariano Grossi, described the ongoing crisis of safety oversight as a dire threat to public health and the environment in Ukraine, and far beyond its borders, describing the situation as “completely out of control.” “You have a catalogue of things that should never be happening in any nuclear facility,” he said. While Grossi has suggested a mission to the plant, ironically Ukraine has been blocking the initiative, with Energoatom arguing as recently as June that any visit would legitimise Russia’s presence there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T13:32:37Z'}, {'id': '62f0ee758f08b2ca242c74e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An eight-year-old British boy has been attacked by sharks while on holiday in the Bahamas. Finley Downer was surrounded by three nurse sharks while swimming in a lagoon last week, his family said, before he was pulled to safety after suffering bites on both legs. Finley was then taken to a clinic in the capital, Nassau, where he underwent a three-hour operation, according to PA Media. Finley’s father, Michael Downer, 44, told the Sun: “It was like a scene out of Jaws,” adding that his son could have been killed. Michael had taken the family, including Finley and his sisters Lily, nine, and Emily, 12, on a five-island tour when the attack took place at Compass Cay. The family told the paper they joined a crowd of people swimming among nurse sharks in the lagoon.\nDescribing the scene, his father recalled there was so much blood as his son said to him: “Dad, I don’t want to die.” The family has since returned home to Kettering, Northamptonshire, where Finley is recovering. Tour guide operator Exuma Escapes told the Sun the family entered a lagoon not used on their tour, without a guide. They described nurse sharks as docile bottom-feeders, “unless handled incorrectly”. Exuma Escapes has been approached for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T12:37:41Z'}]}