{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Asleep at the wheel’: Canada police’s spyware admission raises alarm', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-07T22:13:48Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/07/canada-police-spyware-admission-surveillance-experts', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Canada', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Surveillance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/surveillance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Leyland Cecco', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leyland-cecco'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 8, 'elements': [{'id': '62c714a68f08ea322519f2dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A looming hunger catastrophe is set to explode over the next two years, creating the risk of unprecedented global political pressure, the executive director of the UN World Food Programme has warned. Calling for short- and long-term reforms – including an urgent lifting of the blockade on 25m tonnes of Ukrainian grain trapped by a Russian blockade – David Beasley said the current food affordability crisis is likely to turn into an even more dangerous food availability crisis next year unless solutions are found. The number of people classed as “acutely food insecure” by the UN before the Covid crisis was 130 million, but after Covid this number rose to 276 million.\nWriting a preface to a new pamphlet from the Blair Institute on the looming hunger crisis, Beasley says: “This number has increased to 345 million due to the Ukraine crisis. And a staggering 50 million people in 45 countries are now just one step from famine. “The international community must act to stop this looming hunger catastrophe in its tracks – or these numbers will explode. “Global food markets have been plunged into turmoil, with soaring prices, export bans and shortages of basic foodstuffs spreading far from Ukraine’s borders. Nations across Africa, the Middle East, Asia and even Latin America are feeling the heat from this conflict.” Beasley says that threats to global food security have been exacerbated by the upheaval in worldwide fuel and fertiliser markets. “Without urgent action, food production and crop yields will be slashed. This raises the frightening possibility that on top of today’s food-pricing crisis, the world will also face a genuine crisis of food availability over the next 12 to 24 months – and with it, the spectre of multiple famines.” Food prices reached a 10-year high in 2022, although there has been a slight easing in the past two months. The crisis has been stoked by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and its Black Sea blockade preventing crucial grain exports. Launching the pamphlet A Global Crisis, Tony Blair told the Guardian the food crisis now hitting poor countries in Africa, Middle east and Asia “is absolutely likely to cause serious unrest in the same way as it did before the Arab Spring”. He said: “There is a real risk that this is not simply a problem just for this year but could be worse next year because of the huge problems next year in getting food fertilisers to make the crops succeed.\n“This is going to affect millions of people and has to be brought centre stage at the G20 in a way it is not at present. It is understandable when leaders are concentrating on their own cost of living crisis, but I can tell you from my contacts that this issue is a big preoccupation of African leaders.” An increasing concern is the lack of fertilisers, and their escalating price. In 2021 Russia supplied 23% of African fertiliser imports, doubling its 2020 share, leaving Africa dangerously exposed just as Europe has been exposed by its reliance on Russian gas. This means, the pamphlet says, “that it’s not just Ukraine from where next year’s harvest – and more to come – will be impacted by the Russian invasion. The soaring price of fertilisers limits the ability of countries to boost their own agricultural productivity just when it is most critical that they make up for a drop in global grain exports.” The grain crisis is likely to be a major source of conflict at a meeting of G20 foreign ministers in Bali, the first time Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, has confronted his western opponents collectively since the crisis began. The US hopes to finally skewer Russia’s false excuses over the blockade. But many eastern European countries are deeply sceptical that Vladimir Putin is serious about finding a solution to the Black Sea grain blockade. One foreign minister from central Europe said, “Putin wants to start a fire in Africa and the Middle East, and he does not care about the consequences. It is a deliberate strategy.”\nThe minister doubted Putin was sincere about a solution to the blockade, pointing out that the UN and Turkish efforts at mediation on a naval convoy had already lasted a month and not yet succeeded. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, told G7 leaders more than a week ago that the moment of truth in the mediation had been reached, yet there has been no subsequent breakthrough. Putin seems only willing to lift the blockade of Ukraine’s grain-exporting ports if wider Russian sanctions are lifted, Boris Johnson indicated this week. Poland and other countries are urging the EU to recognise the blockade cannot be lifted by negotiation or by force and should instead focus on exporting the grain by train through Poland. This would require a long-term contract being given to Polish and Baltic ports for them to make the necessary investments. Official figures on the precise additional impact of the Ukrainian port blockade differ, but UN officials on Wednesday said the conflict will mean an extra 13 million severely malnourished this year and 17 million in 2023. It suggested that if the blockade is not lifted by October, and the next harvest, as much as 70m of grain in Ukraine could be trapped. The Blair team agree that lifting the blockade will not alone undo the damage that’s already been done to global food security, saying: “This is a crisis that will play out over years, not months.” • This article was amended on 8 July 2022. The executive director of the UN World Food Programme is David Beasley, not Patrick Beasley as an earlier version said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-08T08:20:35Z'}, {'id': '62c709d78f08ea322519f247', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An admission from Canada’s national police force that it routinely uses powerful spyware to surveil citizens has prompted concern from experts, who warn the country is “asleep at the wheel” when it comes to regulating and reining in use of the technology. During a parliamentary session in late June, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police submitted a document, first reported in Politico, outlining how a special investigative team covertly infiltrates the mobile devices of Canadians. The tools, which have been used on at least 10 investigations between 2018 and 2020, give the police access to text messages, email, photos, videos, audio files, calendar entries and financial records. The software can also remotely turn on the camera and microphone of a suspect’s phone or laptop. The RCMP, which has long evaded questions over whether it uses spyware to track Canadians, provided the information about its “on-device investigative tools” in response to a question from a Conservative lawmaker about how the federal government collects data on its citizens.\nRon Deibert, a political science professor at the university of Toronto and head of Citizen Lab, said the spyware, which gives police an “extraordinary window into every aspect of someone’s personal life” is akin to “nuclear-level technology” – but has little government oversight. “There’s a culture of secrecy that pervades the intelligence and law enforcement community in this country,” he said Deibert, one the world’s leading experts on the surveillance techniques used by authoritarian regimes, said he and others have long suspected police and government agencies in Canada were using the technology. But absent from the disclosure was any indication of who the government is purchasing the software from. “That’s my biggest unanswered question,” he said. “Because we know there are some companies that are horrible when it comes to due diligence and routinely sell to governments that use it for grotesque human rights violations.” Last year, a collaborative investigation between the Guardian and other major international outlets, called the Pegasus project, revealed that spyware licensed by the Israeli firm NSO Group had been used to hack smartphones belonging to journalists, lawyers and human rights activists. In 2021 the commerce department in the United States announced it had placed mercenary spyware companies like NSO on the country’s Entity List, effectively blacklisting them for their “malicious cyber activities” amid growing concern from US officials that the software posed a grave risk to national security. In contrast, Canadian authorities have shown little appetite to take similar action, said Deibert, who has briefed senior Canadian officials within successive governments. “Developing export controls and putting more transparency and accountability around procurement practice is a no-brainer,” he said. The RCMP says it only uses the tools when less intrusive means have failed. In the document, the police force claims it needs to use spyware because new technologies, like end-to-end encryption, make it “exponentially more difficult for the RCMP to conduct court-authorized electronic surveillance”. But privacy advocates disagree. “The creation of the metaphor of ‘police investigations going dark’ because of advances in technology is the public relations coup of the 21st century,” said Brenda McPhail, director of the privacy technology and surveillance program for the Canadian Civil Liberties Association. “The case has not been made to the public for the use of this powerful spyware, particularly given the profoundly dangerous uses of this technology around the world.”\nMcPhail points to previous instances in which the RCMP has been evasive and misleading about the technology it uses for surveillance, including a recent controversy over mobile device identifiers, known as IMSI catchers or stingrays. In September 2017, Canada’s privacy commissioner found the police agency had broken the law six times when it used the technology. “The policy has been, we’re going to do what we can and in secret. If it comes out, then we’ll see what we can do to mitigate the harm,” said McPhail. In the parliamentary document, the RCMP says it didn’t consult the federal privacy commissioner before using the technology – but said it nonetheless needs the approval of a judge when monitoring Canadians. The latest revelations about police surveillance power once again highlight the need for a debate over the “crisis of accountability” in law enforcement, said McPhail. “We need to be having a conversation about what kinds of surveillance technologies – invasive tools being used without any evidence of due process or due consideration of the rights and freedoms of people – are acceptable in a democracy and under what conditions. And we need to determine what sort of safeguards there need to be as well.” Plans to modernize the Privacy Act in the coming months give lawmakers a window of opportunity to adopt the right legislative framework to ensure police have access to tools they need for investigative work, said McPhail, and not broad powers “shrouded by secrecy” and without public accountability. “The devices we hold in our hands are generally designed to extract as much personal information from us as they possibly can,” said Deibert. But a documented history of police abusing surveillance tools in the country meant that the recent admissions of the use of mercenary spyware should be enough to trigger an investigation into whether there is proper oversight to prevent abuse, he added. “Private companies and banks presumably know a lot about your preferences, but only the government can take away your freedom and put you in jail. Only the government can end your life in some jurisdictions,” he said. “That’s why there should be a higher threshold for public accountability and transparency when these tools are used by state agencies.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-08T15:18:18Z'}, {'id': '62c518498f084f4c6fce7d69', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former Pacific leaders have called for “urgent actions” to reduce global carbon emissions, including a commitment to no new coal or gas projects as Anthony Albanese prepares to travel to Fiji for the most important diplomatic regional meeting in the Pacific. A group of former leaders of Pacific island nations, called Pacific Elders Voice, have called for accelerated efforts to move beyond coal and gas, and for new finance to be made available for loss and damage caused by the climate crisis, in the foreword to a new report released today by the Australia-based Climate Council. “The latest assessments are clear: global emissions must be halved during this decade. There is no room for new coal and gas,” wrote the group, which includes former leaders of Tuvalu, Kiribati, Marshall Islands and Palau. “The primary security threat to the Pacific islands is climate change.”\nThe call for action comes as leaders prepare to meet in Suva, Fiji, for the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF), the annual diplomatic meeting of Pacific nations. Pacific analysts and politicians say that the PIF in Fiji will be the first real test of the new government’s climate commitment. “I welcome the policies of the new government,” said Enele Sopoaga, the former prime minister of Tuvalu, who is part of the Pacific Elders Voice. “That said … I would urge the new Australian government to step up its response and really make sure the issue of urgency of response and the adequacy of response is there.” Sopoaga referenced the Albanese government increasing the target for greenhouse gas emissions to be cut by 43%, but said such a target was “far from being adequate”. “They need to do much more, they need to do not just these minimal targets, but move towards meeting more like 75% targets to catch up with the rest of the world. These are very tangible gestures that the leaders in Suva will be looking at. Also on funding, they will be looking to Australia to step up funding to the Green Climate Fund for adaptation or mitigation on climate change.”\nThe report from the Climate Council called on the Australian government to commit to no new coal or gas developments, the new 2030 emissions reduction target of 43%, which is soon to be enshrined in legislation, being a “floor not a ceiling”, Australia rejoining the Green Climate Fund and dramatically scaling up its climate finance commitment. Dr Wesley Morgan, a Climate Council researcher said: “Clearly the new government’s climate policies are a real shift from the previous government. “That has been welcomed. The Samoan prime minister said ‘this brings Australia into closer alignment with the Pacific’. Of course, Australia’s new climate targets bring Australia into closer alignment with the rest of the world but in no way is Australia leading the pack.” Morgan said the issue of Australia’s coal and gas exports – Australia is the third largest exporter of fossil fuels in the world – will be a major one for Pacific countries. “They will want to see substantive signs from the new Australian government that it is going to move away from coal and gas exports. They will want signals that Australia’s love affair with coal and gas is coming to an end.”\nNext week’s meeting is the first time that the Pacific Islands Forum will be held in-person since Scott Morrison attended in Tuvalu in 2019. At that meeting, hosted by Tuvalu, a low-lying atoll nation which is considered one of the most vulnerable countries in the world due to rising sea levels, Australia was seen as a pariah in the group due to unwillingness to heed calls for more urgent action to address the climate crisis. The prime minister of Fiji, Frank Bainimarama, told the Guardian at the 2019 forum that Morrison’s “insulting and condescending” behaviour to the other leaders during their day-long meeting, had almost led to the meeting breaking down and could drive Pacific countries closer to the arms of China. Since coming to power in May, the Albanese government has attempted to repair relationships with Pacific countries, including by promising more urgent climate action. The foreign minister, Penny Wong, in a speech in Suva in May, said that under past governments Australia had “neglected its responsibility to act on climate” and showed disrespect to Pacific nations, but was determined to repair the relationship.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T11:00:13Z'}, {'id': '62bebf658f08b64e5c2dd441', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My grandmother Mary West, who has died aged 103, was an independent spirit, a matriarch and an active community figure in Somerset. Born two months after the end of the first world war at her maternal grandparents’ house on the Isle of Wight, Mary never knew her father, who was killed during the last weeks of the war. A few years later her mother, Alma (nee Haynes), a grocery shop worker, married Harold Singleton, with whom she had a son, John. The family settled in Purfleet, Essex, and Mary went to Grays Convent high school, where she was quite a handful. On an exchange trip to a convent near Lille in France, she climbed out of a bedroom window and slipped away to a nightclub. After leaving school Mary trained as a secretary. During the second world war she worked at the Bank of England as a confidential secretary to the governor, Montagu Norman, as the blitz raged around London. The core staff had sleeping quarters in the bank vaults, and despite a strict daytime dress code, she remembered having to deliver urgent telex messages to the governor in her nightclothes. In 1942 Mary married Roger West, a captain in the airborne division of the Royal Army Medical Corps, and they had three children, Mark, Andrew and Crispin. In 1952 they all moved to Wraxall in Somerset, where Mary worked tirelessly to provide a loving, caring and warm home. This included rearing a variety of animals, including goats, pigs, chickens, and turkeys. Milk came from Clarabel, the much-loved house cow. Mary contributed in many ways to the community around her, including through service as a youth counsellor and magistrate at Long Ashton, as chair of the local youth court, and as a founder member of, and fundraiser for, St Peter’s Hospice in Bristol. She and Roger travelled widely across the Americas, Africa and Asia, and went on many trips to see Andrew, a doctor in Bermuda, where she was occasionally invited to sit as a visiting magistrate. Mary had a love of cars, and was still was driving at 102; she detested being driven by anyone else. A few years ago when she was unwell, a doctor called an ambulance and she insisted to the crew that if she had to go with them, then she must do the driving, as she had driven ambulances in the war. Her offer was politely refused. An insatiable reader, in particular of novels and biographies, Mary never missed the daily newspaper. She cared greatly for her donkeys and her dog, and ever curious about technology, was a regular email and social media user. Roger died in 2001, Crispin in 2002, and her grandson Matthew in 2018. She is survived by Mark and Andrew, eight grandchildren and 13 great-grandchildren.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T16:53:17Z'}, {'id': '62c6ebe88f08599e90423999', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Canadian swimmer has said she was drugged at a recent world championship event in Budapest, leaving her with a concussion and rib sprain. Mary-Sophie Harvey said on her Instagram account that she was drugged on the final night while celebrating in the Hungarian capital and that there was a “four-to-six-hour window where I can’t recall a single thing”. The sport’s international governing body, Fina, said it would launch an investigation into the incident, calling the allegations “distressing” and said it was “deeply concerned” about Harvey’s wellbeing. Harvey, 22, swam in last year’s Tokyo Olympics and won a bronze medal in the relay at the world championship. But in a post to Instagram, the swimmer went public with a personal account of the incident that has left her searching for answers. “On the last night of the World Championships, I got drugged,” she wrote, posting images of several bruises on her body. “At the time I wasn’t aware of what got inside of me, I just remember waking up the next morning completely lost; with our team manager and doctor at my bedside … The only thing I can say is this: I’ve never felt more ashamed,” she wrote, adding that in addition to support from friends and family, she had also experienced judgment. After she travelled back to Canada, her mother remarked that she seemed different. “It felt like the body I was in, wasn’t mine [it still feels this way]. I got home and found a dozen bruises on my body,” she wrote. “Some of my friends told me afterwards that they had to carry me while I was unconscious and it probably explained why.” Harvey was treated at the hospital by doctors and psychologists and said she felt “lucky” to emerge from the incident with a rib sprain and concussion. “Sadly, these events happen more than we think it does. There’s been a dangerous increasing number of cases reported throughout the years but it is still not being talked about enough. The resources for victims are still difficult to find and the judgment from outsiders are still very much present. To anyone reading this, please be careful. I thought I was safe, that it would never happen to me, especially while being surrounded by friends. But it did.” Swimming Canada said in a statement it was aware of “an incident” during the competition. “As soon as team staff became aware, Mary received excellent medical treatment from our team physician on site, and was cleared to travel home.” Harvey wrote she was trying her best to focus on the Commonwealth Games in Birmingham, England, this summer, where she is slated to compete. “I’m still scared to think about the unknowns of that night,” she wrote. “I’m still in a way, ashamed of what happened, and I think I always will be … But I won’t let this event define me.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-08T08:19:42Z'}, {'id': '62c60d588f089a79171d40eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least one person has been killed and six injured by a missile strike on Kramatorsk which hit a residential area, according to Ukraine’s regional governor of Donetsk, Pavlo Kyrylenko. The evacuation of civilians from Sloviansk continued on Wednesday as Russian troops pressed towards the eastern Ukrainian city in their campaign to control the Donbas region. Mayor Vadym Lyakh said that about 23,000 people out of 110,000 were still in Sloviansk but claimed Russia had been unable to surround the city. The governor of Donetsk has also urged the region’s 350,000 people to flee. The battle for Sloviansk is likely to be the next key contest in the struggle for Donbas as Russian forces approach to within 16km of the Donetsk town, British intelligence said. Russian forces from the eastern and western groups of forces are likely now around 16km north of Sloviansk as central and southern groups of forces also pose a threat to the town, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. Russia’s defence ministry has said it killed Ukrainian servicemen who were trying to raise Ukraine’s flag on the recently retaken Snake Island. The daily operational briefing from Russia’s military states: “Around 5am several Ukrainian servicemen landed on the island from a motorboat and took pictures with the flag. The aircraft of the Russian Aerospace Forces immediately launched a strike with high-precision missiles on Zmiinyi Island, as a result of which part of the Ukrainian military personnel was destroyed.” Authorities in Odesa appeared to confirm that missiles had struck the island, and that Russians had also destroyed tow grain hangars in the region which contained “about 35 tonnes of grain”. The capture of the city of Lysychansk in eastern Ukraine has given Russia’s forces “genuine headway”, while its forces in the south have shown signs of “better cooperation”, analysts say. Western officials said the sustainability of Russia’s attacks on Ukraine was “challenging”, but described the impact on their munitions and morale as “remarkable”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said heavy weapons from western allies have finally begun working at “full capacity” on frontlines. In his nightly video address, Zelenskiy said the Ukrainian military has been able to target Russian warehouses and locations that are “important for logistics”. Resistance remains ongoing in villages around Lysychansk, where 15,000 civilians remain, according to Luhansk’s governor, Serhiy Haidai. On Telegram, Haidai said: “Today’s videos from Lysychansk are painful to watch.” He accused Putin’s troops of engaging in a scorched earth policy, “burning down and destroying everything on their way”. Ukraine has rejected the claim that Russian forces destroyed two advanced US-made Himars rocket systems and their ammunition depots in eastern Ukraine. Ukraine’s general staff said the claims by Russia’s defence ministry were fake and that it was using the US-supplied Himars to inflict “devastating blows” on Russian forces. A Russian missile has hit a tanker carrying 500 tonnes of diesel drifting in the Black Sea, according to the Ukrainian military. Two KH-31 missiles were fired and one hit the Moldovan-flagged Millennial Spirit, Ukraine’s operational command south said. The ship has now been struck twice since Russian troops entered Ukraine, and has been drifting without a crew and with the remnants of diesel fuel on board. Zelenskiy posted images of him meeting two US senators in Kyiv – the Republican Lindsey Graham and Richard Blumenthal of the Democratic party. Ukraine’s president said “Bicameral and bipartisan support is very important to us.” Ukraine’s foreign ministry said Thursday a Russian ship carrying Ukrainian grain had been allowed to leave the Turkish port of Karasu, calling it an “unacceptable situation and summoning Turkey’s ambassador. “We regret that Russia’s ship Zhibek Zholy, which was full of stolen Ukrainian grain, was allowed to leave Karasu port despite criminal evidence presented to the Turkish authorities,” foreign ministry spokesperson Oleg Nikolenko. The British prime minister Boris Johnson has announced he is to resign, telling Ukraine “we in the UK will continue to back your fight for freedom for as long as it takes”. Defence secretary Ben Wallace had already said he would not be stepping down from office, due to national security issues, which include the UK’s contributions to Ukraine’s war effort. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said reports that Johnson would shortly resign as prime minister were of little concern for the Kremlin, saying “he doesn’t like us, we don’t like him either.” Russia’s RIA Novosti news agency reports that the British embassy in Moscow has said it will not be using its new address of Lugansk People’s Republic. Moscow mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, signed a decree on 5 July to give an unnamed stretch of territory located along the Smolenskaya embankment the new name. The US embassy in Moscow now similarly finds itself located in Donetsk People’s Republic Square. Finland’s parliament has voted in favour of legislation that would allow barriers on the country’s border with Russia. The bill on preparedness was passed by a supermajority that allows parliament to fast-track laws, amid fears Russia could retaliate over Finland’s plans to join the Nato military alliance. The law also has implications for asylum seekers to Finland as it will allow the government to build fences or other barriers near Finnish borders and direct all asylum applications to one or several border crossings, such as an airport. Ireland’s taoiseach, Micheál Martin, visited the war-scarred suburbs of Borodianka, Bucha and Irpin on the outskirts of Kyiv on Wednesday. Martin said he and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, discussed a joint response to the threat to food security, the energy crisis and the preparation of the seventh sanction package against Russia. Martin reiterated his country’s solidarity with Ukraine. Russian forces have occupied about 22% of Ukraine’s arable land, according to Nasa’s Harvest mission. Since the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Nasa has been focusing on the impact of the war on the global food system. Its findings have revealed that Ukrainian fields where 28% of winter and 18% of spring crops are sown are under Russian occupation. Sri Lanka’s president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, said he asked his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin to help import fuel to his country as it faces its worst economic crisis in seven decades. Rajapaksa tweeted that he had a “productive” telephone call with Putin, while thanking him for “all the support extended by his [government] to overcome the challenges of the past”. Zelenskiy called on the world’s largest independent oil trader to stop shipping Russian oil, accusing it of “brazen profiteering from blood oil”. Ukraine’s military announced plans to introduce a system of permits that would prohibit men eligible for conscription from leaving the region where they are registered. The move, based on legislation from 1992, was intended to enable the country’s armed forces to locate potential conscripts more easily, but it prompted an immediate backlash. Nearly 9 million people have left Ukraine since Russia invaded, the UN refugee agency has said. With Russia stepping up its offensive in the east of the country, there are increasingly loud calls from Ukrainian authorities for people to escape while they can from frontline areas.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T14:16:41Z'}, {'id': '62c6d90d8f08599e904238c0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces are finally seeing the impact of western weapons on the frontlines of the war with Russia, Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said. Experts say while western equipment has been crucial for pushing back Russian forces, the west will need to scale up its supplies, and even mobilise its own defence industries, if it wants to avoid a war of attrition that Ukraine could lose. During his nightly TV address, Zelenskiy said that thanks to western supplies, Ukrainian forces were advancing in two directions in the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions on Ukraine’s southern front and dealing blows to Russia by hitting some of its logistics warehouses. “Finally, [Ukraine] feels that western artillery is working very powerfully,” he said, adding that it had “inflicted very noticeable blows on warehouses and other points that are important for [Russia’s] logistics.” He said the Ukrainian strikes had “significantly reduced the offensive potential of the Russian army”. Vladimir Putin hit back, saying that if the west wanted to defeat Russia on the battlefield, it was welcome to try. In televised remarks to parliamentary leaders, the Russian president said: “Today we hear that they want to defeat us on the battlefield. What can you say, let them try. We have heard many times that the west wants to fight us to the last Ukrainian. This is a tragedy for the Ukrainian people, but it seems that everything is heading towards this.” Ukrainian forces published a video of what they said was a successful strike on a Russian ammunition warehouse in occupied eastern Ukraine. They did not reveal the exact location. “The first type of equipment that the west supplied to Ukraine was the equipment that did not have complex supply-chain issues,” said Jack Watling, a senior research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, referring to equipment Ukrainians would not need training on or need spare parts for. He said that since the initial emergency supplies, Ukraine had asked its allies for any equipment they were willing to give. Western governments then provided equipment “piecemeal”, he said, “what they have available and what they think [they] can hand over without denuding their own forces too much”. The result is that Ukraine has a wide range of equipment pieces that require their own ammunition, spare parts and training processes, said Watling. This has created some short-term problems for Ukraine’s command and, along with the logistics of getting the equipment to Ukraine’s front, has caused delays and low availability. “What we’ve seen in the past few weeks is a recognition from countries that there needs to be more systemic support, so we’ve seen countries deliver more of systems that they’ve previously delivered as well as Himars,” said Watling, referring to US-supplied rocket launchers. “And this is making a tactical difference, but Ukraine still has to manage multiple supply chains, relatively small fleets of a lot of different systems, and the ammunition available is very limited.”\nWatling said Nato’s limited ammunition stocks meant the west would have to mobilise its own defence industry if it wanted to continue to support Ukraine’s military and avoid a protracted war of attrition. Serhiy Kuzan, the chair of the Ukrainian Security and Cooperation Center in Kyiv, said Ukraine had noticed a difference on the front from the moment the Himars and howitzers arrived. “It allows us to participate in what is an artillery duel,” he said. “And with the longer-range rockets we have destroyed over 20 warehouses of Russian artillery and it has slowed Russia’s offensive. They are having to be more careful.” Kuzan said that so far western supplies had not given Ukraine a watershed moment in the war, as Russia still had more artillery pieces and ammunition than Ukraine. “But now we are not just trying to survive their bombs and rockets but hit their warehouses. Russia uses so much artillery ammunition they need large supplies bases, so this has now become our main aim.” Ivan Sechin, a military expert and former Ukrainian and Soviet military intelligence official, said western weapons’ blows against Russian bases had worked to demoralise the Russian forces as much as destroy their logistics. In several videos published by the Ukrainian armed forces, Russian soldiers can be seen running from burning bases, which Sechin says would have shaken their conception of where they are safe. “It’s clear that it is having an effect because they are continuing to attack but not at the same rate as before,” said Sechin. “But with current supplies, Ukraine can only hold them and doesn’t have the ability to launch significant counteroffensives. The west are still worried about provoking Russia but they must see that the Russian army is not as powerful as we once thought. They are presenting their small wins [in the east] as a great victory.” Russian forces killed at least seven civilians and injured others in the last 24 hours throughout battle-scarred Donetsk, said the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko. Kramatorsk, Ukraine’s de-facto administrative centre in Donetsk, was struck by Russia on Thursday, Agence France-Presse said, killing at least one civilian and injuring several others.\nThough shelling continues in eastern Ukraine, the Institute for the Study of War, a Washington-based thinktank, said Moscow may be taking an “operational pause”. “Russian forces will likely confine themselves to relatively small-scale offensive actions as they attempt to set conditions for more significant offensive operations and rebuild the combat power needed to attempt those more ambitious undertakings,” the institute said. Russia’s defence ministry seemed to confirm that assessment in a statement on Thursday, saying its units were being given time to rest in order to “recover their combat capabilities”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T17:40:00Z'}, {'id': '62c6a7588f088ba9fc80e04f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Animal welfare campaigners are calling on UK supermarkets to stop selling premium ham, including Parma, produced in “sow stalls” on EU farms. An undercover investigation conducted by Compassion in World Farming (CWF), an animal welfare campaign group, found that sows are forced to spend many weeks in cages so small they can only stand up and lie down. The campaign group’s footage from 16 farms across Italy, Spain, France and Poland shows the sows in cage systems, including those supplying premium Parma and Bayonne hams. The cages have been banned in the UK since 1999 and in Sweden, but their limited use is still legal in the EU, allowing sows to be kept in cages from the weaning of the previous litter until the end of the sows’ first four weeks of pregnancy. Last June, the European Commission promised to phase out the use of cages in all animal farming across the EU by 2027. CWF’s investigators alleged that sows on these farms were kept in the same extreme confinement as those on standard farms, and estimates that 85% of sows in the EU are kept in these conditions. Sows lie in their own excrement and urine, are unable to nurture their young, and resort to abnormal repetitive behaviour such as bar biting and chewing the air, the report alleged. Sarah Moyes, CWF’s senior campaigns manager, said: “Compassion in World Farming would like to see all retailers, producers and food companies, make cage-free commitments for food production.” The group is also sending its findings to agriculture ministers across Europe and urging them to introduce the EU ban on caged farming without delay. CWF said 8m branded Parma hams are produced in Italy every year, 36% of which are exported. Just under half of all exported Parma is sold within the EU, but the UK is the top export market for pre-sliced Parma ham. The British Retail Consortium said UK retailers had led the way in requiring high animal welfare standards from all its farmers, in the UK or abroad, to reflect consumer demand, including in all areas of pork production. However, Andrew Opie, director of food and sustainability at the British Retail Consortium, said: “It is more challenging with speciality hams where the UK has a small share of a highly regulated product, and the focus is on production methods.”\nTesco’s animal welfare policy states that sows must not be kept in stalls. A Tesco spokesperson said: “Animal welfare is incredibly important to us and all of our pigs are reared to recognised farm assurance standards… As part of these standards we do not allow the use of sow stalls in our supply chains.” Waitrose said it was working to ensure all of its farms totally end the use of sow stalls by 2025.A Waitrose spokesperson said: “Animal welfare is key to our brand. We have led the way for pig welfare in the UK and now we want to ensure that sow stalls have no place in our supply chain by 2025.” Sainsbury’s does not sell Bayonne ham. A spokesperson said: “All our suppliers have to meet strict welfare standards and be certified under one of our approved farm assurance schemes, in addition to complying with EU legislation.” Asda said all of its meat was supplied according to the relevant EU and UK legislation. CWF is also campaigning for a UK ban on the use of farrowing crates, in which pregnant sows are placed shortly before giving birth.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T16:39:34Z'}, {'id': '62c6b9a58f080c84da94e25c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Families bereaved by Covid insisted Boris Johnson must still face justice at the public inquiry into the pandemic as they voiced concern that his resignation would see him make a fortune from writing and speeches while they remained scarred by grief.\nJohnson’s departure was greeted by relief by people who lost loved ones to the virus over the last two and half years, but the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group, which represents more than 4,000 affected families, said: “Johnson will always be the man that wanted to ‘let the bodies pile high’ while our loved ones desperately fought for their lives and that partied whilst we had to say goodbye to our loved ones over a screen.” The prime minister was responsible for a delayed start to the statutory public inquiry into the UK’s handling of the pandemic, which was only formally opened last week despite his earlier pledge in parliament to start in spring 2022. “The Covid inquiry has only just been given the go ahead – two and a half years late,” said Lindsay Jackson, who lost her mother Sylvia Jackson to Covid on 17 April 2020. “I want to see people held to account – including Johnson – for the callous disregard he showed to my mum and the other souls who lost their lives.” “This is a man who has presided over the deaths of 200,000 people, broken the laws he made, lied repeatedly to us, trashed our international reputation and has brought politics and politicians into disrepute,” she said. “There’s very little more that he could have done wrong. But he’s just losing his job. He’ll lick his wounds, blame everyone else and then make his millions. That’s not justice.”\nLeshie Chandrapala, who lost her father Ranjith Chandrapala, a London bus driver who worked without PPE, in May 2020, said she was disappointed that Johnson’s handling of the pandemic was not among the reasons for his departure. “We need Boris Johnson to go immediately so that the business of serious government can resume, including the public inquiry into the pandemic,” she said. “He absolutely must not be allowed to stay until autumn as a caretaker PM.”\nShe added: “He got so many things wrong during the pandemic, so I absolutely want to see him held to account at the public inquiry. I am putting my faith in Baroness Hallett and her team to uncover the truth of Boris Johnson’s actions.”\nThe inquiry has started gathering evidence and is expected to be divided into several strands, many of which will examine decision-making in Downing Street. Hearings are not expected to begin until 2023. In recent days Johnson allies have repeated his assertion that he “got the big calls right” on the pandemic, often citing the successful vaccination programme. But Lobby Akinnola, who lost his father Olufemi, a care worker, in April 2020, said: “While Johnson will move on to a life of writing newspaper columns and being paid eyewatering amounts to give after dinner speeches, there will be no moving on for the families like mine that have been ripped apart by his actions. Although his reign will shortly be coming to an end, his devastating impact on families like mine will not. “We can only hope that the Covid inquiry will bring some closure for us, teaching us the lessons that will save lives in the future and meaning that no one will be able to repeat Johnson’s terrible mistakes and get away with it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T14:03:43Z'}, {'id': 'b979749c-71dc-42b4-bca9-2f0cc862b9fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the FBI and the leader of Britain’s domestic intelligence agency have delivered an unprecedented joint address raising fresh alarm about the Chinese government, warning business leaders that Beijing is determined to steal their technology for competitive gain. In a speech at MI5’s London headquarters intended as a show of western solidarity, Christopher Wray, the FBI director, stood alongside the MI5 director general, Ken McCallum. Wray reaffirmed longstanding concerns about economic espionage and hacking operations by China, as well as the Chinese government’s efforts to stifle dissent abroad. “We consistently see that it’s the Chinese government that poses the biggest long-term threat to our economic and national security, and by ‘our’, I mean both of our nations, along with our allies in Europe and elsewhere,” Wray said. He told the audience the Chinese government was “set on stealing your technology, whatever it is that makes your industry tick, and using it to undercut your business and dominate your market”. Ken McCallum said MI5 was running seven times as many investigations into China as it had been four years ago and planned to “grow as much again” to tackle the widespread attempts at inference which pervade “so many aspects of our national life”. “Today is the first time the heads of the FBI and MI5 have shared a public platform,” McCallum said. “We’re doing so to send the clearest signal we can on a massive shared challenge: China.”\nMcCallum said the Chinese government and its “covert pressure across the globe” amounted to “the most game-changing challenge we face. “This might feel abstract. But it’s real and it’s pressing,” he said. “We need to talk about it. We need to act.” A spokesman for the Chinese embassy in Washington, Liu Pengyu, rejected the allegations from the western leaders, saying in an emailed statement to the Associated Press that China “firmly opposes and combats all forms of cyber-attacks” and calling the accusations groundless. “We will never encourage, support or condone cyber-attacks,” the statement said. Asked about Wray’s comments at a briefing on Thursday, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian told reporters: “The relevant US politician has been playing up the so-called China threat to smear and attack China. Facts have fully proven that the US is the biggest threat to world peace, stability and development. We urge this US official to have the right perspective, see China’s developments in an objective and reasonable manner and stop spreading lies and stop making irresponsible remarks.” In a nod to current tensions between China and Taiwan, Wray also said during his speech that any forcible takeover of Taipei by Beijing “would represent one of the most horrific business disruptions the world has ever seen”. Last week, the US government’s director of national intelligence, Avril Haines, said at an event in Washington that there were no indications that Xi Jinping, the Chinese president, was poised to take Taiwan by military force. But she that did say Xi appeared to be “pursuing the potential” for such an action as part of a broader Chinese government goal of reunification with Taiwan. After the appearance, Wray said he would leave to others the question of whether an invasion of Taiwan was more or less likely after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. But, he said, “I don’t have any reason to think their interest in Taiwan has abated in any fashion” and added that he hoped China had learned what happens “when you overplay your hand”, as he said Russia had. Joe Biden said in May that the US would respond militarily if China invaded Taiwan, offering one of the most forceful White House statements in support of Taiwan’s self-governing in decades. The White House later tried to soften the impact of the statement, saying Biden was not outlining a change in US policy toward Taiwan, a self-governing island that China views as a breakaway province that should be reunified with the mainland. The embassy spokesman said the Taiwan issue was “purely China’s internal affair” and said when it came to questions of China’s territory and sovereignty, the country has “no room for compromise or concession.” “We will strive for the prospect of peaceful reunification with utmost sincerity and efforts,” the statement said, though it noted that China would “reserve the option of taking all necessary measures in response to the interference of foreign forces”. The Associated Press and Press Association contributed reporting', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T14:13:45Z'}]}