{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Angry winter’: Germany’s Monday night protests unite far-right and left', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-07T06:00:34Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/07/angry-winter-germanys-monday-night-protests-unite-far-right-and-left', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Germany', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany'}, {'tagTitle': "Europe's cost of living crisis", 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/europe-s-cost-of-living-crisis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'This is Europe (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/this-is-europe'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kate Connolly', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kateconnolly'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '6390a7318f086664c1733981', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For decades, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner dominated Argentina’s political landscape: as a senator, first lady, president and then vice-president. But on Tuesday she was sentenced to six years in prison in a verdict, which if upheld on appeal, will also ban her from holding public office for the rest of her life. Fernández immediately announced that she would not run for president, or any other kind of elected office, in the 2023 elections. The court’s ruling appeared to have abruptly sidelined the country’s most powerful – and most polarising – politician since Juan and Eva Perón, leaving many Argentinians wondering: what will come next?\nCurrently, Fernández enjoys immunity from arrest because of her role as senator and vice-president, and she cannot legally be sent to jail until she has exhausted her appeals – a process which could take years. The judges who found her guilty of defrauding the state will explain how they arrived at their decision at a hearing on 9 March. At that point Fernández will be able to appeal her conviction, first at the federal criminal cassation chamber and then at the supreme court. María Esperanza Casullo, professor of political science at Argentina’s National University of Río Negro, said that Fernández was unlikely to spend any time behind bars: the trials and appeals process against recent presidents such as Carlos Menem and Fernando de la Rua took well over a decade. Furthermore, Argentinian prisoners can request to serve the rest of their sentences under house arrest when they turn 70. Fernández de Kirchner is currently 69. Casullo also highlighted a number of points of controversy in the trial. Argentina’s political system does not automatically impose a lifetime ban on seeking office for this kind of conviction, and in other recent cases, such bans have been for a set period of years. “It seems somewhat disproportionate,” she said. She also highlighted a recent leak which allegedly showed that a judge investigating the case was among several members of the judiciary and prominent businessmen who were flown by private jet to the Patagonian ranch of the British business magnate Joe Lewis, a friend of the rightwing former president – and bitter Fernández foe – Mauricio Macri. Meanwhile, Fernández’s announcement that she will not seek public office in 2023 has wide-reaching implications for the nation’s electoral scenario. Argentina is due to hold general elections in November 2023, and she was widely expected to run for the presidency. Argentina’s current president, Alberto Fernández (no relation to Fernández de Kirchner), served as chief of staff during the 2003-2007 presidency of Fernández de Kirchner’s husband, Néstor Kirchner, and the early days of the Cristina presidency, before breaking with her amid a dispute over agricultural export taxes. It came as a surprise to many when Cristina announced that Alberto would be the presidential candidate and she his running mate in the 2019 presidential elections, given the pair’s differences and his less prominent political profile. Amid a worsening economic panorama, deep divides have emerged in their Frente de Todos coalition this year over issues including a March deal to renegotiate a large sovereign debt owed to the IMF. While Alberto has pursued a market-calming, conciliatory strategy, Cristina has pushed for a more hardline approach to the Washington-based lender. Fernández was president of Argentina between 2007 and 2015, after her husband Néstor left office. Argentina enjoyed growth rates of around 8% per year in the early 2000s, buoyed in part by high commodities prices, and boasted the highest national minimum wage in Latin America. This enabled Kirchnerism to implement a series of policies that favoured the country’s poor, such as providing pensions for housewives, creating a universal child benefit, and opening new public universities. But she had a fractious relationship and a series of political tussles with agribusiness groups, the judiciary and the mass media. “She embodied a spirit of redistributive policies … and confrontation with powerful sectors,” Casullo said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T17:02:24Z'}, {'id': '63908f3f8f086664c173382e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Heinrich XIII, Prince of Reuß The 71-year-old aristocrat, who was arrested in Frankfurt’s West End district on Wednesday morning, has been described by prosecutors as the ringleader of the terrorist group plotting to overthrow the government. If their plan had succeeded, he had envisioned installing himself as the leader of a revolutionary government. A descendant of the House of Reuß that ruled parts of Thuringia, in eastern Germany, for about 800 years, Heinrich in 2019 delivered a 16-minute speech at a digital business summit in Zurich infused with far-right conspiracy theories. “After thousands of years of rule”, he complained, his dynasty had been “dispossessed” after the first world war, a conflict brought about by “foreign powers”. He claimed the dark driving forces behind the 20th century’s great wars were the Rothschild dynasty and Freemasons. “Ever since Germany surrendered, it has never been sovereign again,” he said. “It has only been made an administrative structure of the allies.” In August, the head of the House of Reuß-Greiz, Prince Heinrich XIV Reuß of Greiz, distanced himself in strong terms from his relative, describing him as a “confused old man” who left the family 14 years ago. German media reported Heinrich XIII to have recently earned his living with property deals and the production of sparkling wine.\nRüdiger von Pescatore The 69-year-old retired army officer has been described by prosecutors as the aspiring leader of the terrorist group’s “military arm”. Between 1993 and 1996, Von Pescatore was a commander at paratrooper battalion 251, which was later submerged into the Special Operations Forces Command (KSK). He was reportedly expelled from the military over the unauthorised sale of weapons from the stocks of the old East German army. In 2019, an internet user bearing Von Pescatore’s name made comments on a website that claimed to expose secret Freemason plots behind major events in world history. “The truth will only become accessible to mankind after the system change,” wrote the commenter, who said he was writing from Brazil.\nBirgit Malsack-Winkemann In the post-coup “shadow cabinet” that the terrorist group had allegedly started to plan, the crucial justice ministry was to be reserved for Birgit Malsack-Winkemann, 58, whom police arrested at her apartment in Berlin’s Wannsee district on Wednesday morning. Malsack-Winkemann has been a member of the far-right party Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) since it was formed on an Eurosceptic ticket in 2013. As a member of the Bundestag between 2017 and 2021, the trained lawyer once claimed immigrants were causing “billions in excess costs” to the German health system because they were unable to read instruction leaflets on their medication, a claim dismissed by pharmacists as lacking a basis in fact. Other parliamentarians described Malsack-Winkemann as a supporter of conspiracy theories, with a particular obsession with the QAnon cult, the newspaper Die Zeit reported. A holder of a gun licence, she is understood to own two firearms. As recently as October, a disciplinary tribunal rejected a Left party plea to stop Malsack-Winkemann from returning to her former, supposedly impartial role as a judge at a Berlin district court. At the time, her spokesperson had insisted she was part of the “very moderate” wing of the AfD.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T15:20:06Z'}, {'id': '63906a428f08d2809ffd0008', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his office in Kyiv’s city hall, mayor Vitali Klitschko is planning for the worst and hoping for the best. The previous day, in the middle of the sixth mass Russian missile strike against Ukrainian cities that had sent Kyiv’s resident to the bomb shelters and metro stations, no rockets had made it through to hit the capital. On the mayor’s desk is a newspaper he has had produced and distributed around the city in recent days. Bearing his name, and the headline “We will overcome and win”, it lists all the emergency services in Kyiv that will be available in case of what should be unthinkable but isn’t: the failure of all power and services to a city of 3 million in the depths of Ukraine’s winter. Across three densely printed pages are supermarkets with generators that will work in that emergency, the post offices and banks, and arrangements for public transit. It lists the 45 underground metro stations that will remain open as shelters and provide phone charging and internet, as well as tips for surviving a prolonged blackout.\n“It’s for the worst-case scenario,” says Klitschko, a former world champion boxer turned politician, picking up the paper. “We need to tell people what they need to do if the situation becomes critical and they don’t have internet and connection to media.” Life in the city can often seem largely normal outside of the massive airstrikes that have been taking place, often weekly, since 20 October. Restaurants are busy and the streets are jammed with traffic at close to prewar levels, but with the first snow on the ground and the temperature hitting -8C this week, life in the capital is also overshadowed by the risk of a humanitarian crisis. “Thanks to our military, they knocked out all the missiles fired at Kyiv yesterday,” says Klitschko. “But it was only two weeks ago we came close to a total blackout. Then the temperature was above freezing but imagine the same situation if it happened now when it is close to -10 outside and with no electricity water, or heating. The consequences would be disastrous. “In that attack almost the whole city was without electricity. For the next 12 hours we were working night and day to bring back the power,” he adds.\nUkrainians have coined a word of what Russian is attempting, Kholodomor – mass death by freezing – a play on Holodomor, the portmanteau word used to describe Joseph Stalin’s human-made famine in Ukraine that killed millions in the early 1930s. “We never expected that they would try to destroy the civilian infrastructure of our cities. It is genocidal. It’s terrorism,” says the mayor. “They want to freeze the civilian population. They want to kill us, want to have a Ukraine without Ukrainians.” For Klitschko, efforts to keep the city going have become a blur. “To be honest, it’s one long, long day. Sometimes I’m confused what day of the week it is. I sleep in a different place every night and I don’t know what the challenge will be tomorrow. But I’m still alive and it’s not everyone who has the privilege to be healthy.” If the Kremlin’s effort to freeze Ukraine’s population into capitulating is failing, it is not only because of the country’s rapidly improving air defences but also the enormous efforts to repair power plants as soon as they are damaged.\nEven now, however, power remains patchy in some parts of Kyiv, with energy conservation measures still in force and many businesses outside of the central parts of the city relying on mobile generators. And while many residents of Kyiv were cheered that no missiles or so-called kamikaze drones landed on the city – although they struck elsewhere in Ukraine – Klitschko is not ready to believe the aerial threat is gone – even with the arrival of new air defence systems from western allies. Asked whether those air defences are taking pressure off the city, he says: “Yesterday there were 70 missiles and almost every one was shot down. But just today I was talking to our military partners and I asked them same the question you are asking me. “There’s no clear answer. We can’t tell if our air defences are in perfect condition right now. I can say the situation is better than two weeks ago and much better than two months ago. But we still need help with more, and more modern air defence weapons, to save lives.’ The interconnectedness of Ukraine’s national grid system and the reliance on pumped hot water produced in central plants for heating most homes means Kyiv is vulnerable to attacks elsewhere in the country.\nWhile much has been made of efforts by Ukraine’s allies to send large mobile generating units to help protect critical civilian infrastructure, Klitschko does not see it as the answer. “It’s good that we are seeing big generators being sent but it’s still not a panacea for all challenges we are facing. Just a single one of the water pumping stations in Kyiv requires 4 megawatts to operate. On top of that they require huge amounts of fuel. That’s why those generators are at hospitals and schools, and main sites that are really critical that people really need. Because even with the new generating capacity it’s not enough. It won’t bridge the deficit we’re facing.” For Klitschko, as for other Ukrainian officials, there is only one real answer – the defeat of Russia on the battlefield and the end of the conflict. “I’m not Nostradamus so I’m not ready to give an answer about the timing of when this war will end but I know that we will win. I’ll tell you why. It’s a rule of war that people will die in battle. But what’s most important is the motivation for fighting. “There has been no real explanation to Russian soldiers of why they fight. So they are fighting for money. We are ready to die for our family and children. All of us. We are fighting for our children’s future, for democracy and human rights. Because we don’t want to live in a country that is a jail that is built by Putin. It’s why our soldiers would rather die than bend the knee.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T16:55:02Z'}, {'id': '638fbd6c8f08cb34a8f54a2e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s hard to describe just how good New Zealand felt as summer began at the end of 2020. Aotearoa had seemingly got through the pandemic unscathed, relying on a zero-Covid or “elimination” strategy. We had been in alert level 1 since October, meaning there were no real restrictions on daily life, with huge music festivals and parties going ahead while much of the western world was still struggling with lockdowns.\nThe economy was buzzing, with unemployment dropping off the high it had reached in September of 2020 – defying many predictions that we were in for serious scarring – and house prices engaged in a steady climb upwards into ever-increasing unaffordability. As the year got going, unemployment would continue to fall, while house prices continued to rise. This couldn’t last. But it kind of felt like it could. The overseas jeerers got their insults confused and accused of us over-using lockdowns. The truth was that our “short and sharp” lockdowns had allowed us far more day-to-day freedom than most of the countries still “mitigating” Covid-19. But elimination relied on us essentially telling everyone outside the country to get lost, even if they were citizens, unless they had the time, money, and luck to be able to secure a spot in a managed isolation hotel (MIQ), where they would have to stay for two weeks before entering the country. Even the economic good times – surprising in a country that relies on tourism – were built on the foundations of a disgustingly unequal housing market. So it’s telling that prime minister Jacinda Ardern still had to remind New Zealanders how successful our overall pandemic response had been when she announced a new royal commission of inquiry earlier this week, noting we had seen far fewer deaths than most countries thanks to only allowing the virus in once most people had been vaccinated. Because 2021 and 2022 went on to make a mockery of that good time, at least inside New Zealand. MIQ was one of the sorest points. After it stopped feeling like an emergency the endless stories of bureaucratic cruelty started to really hit, with legions of families separated and people unable to make it home for funerals and new babies. But it was the Delta strain that ruined things, overcoming the restriction that a long Auckland lockdown placed on it, and spreading despite the mass rollout of the vaccine. New Zealand struggled to give up on the elimination strategy that had worked so well, and the messy process of untangling ourselves from it created some policies that deserve serious attention from the royal commission, such as the continued use of MIQ once the elimination battle was lost and the widespread use of vaccine passes and mandates to bar the unvaccinated from certain parts of public and professional life. These tensions reached a crescendo earlier this year when the grounds of parliament were occupied for 24 days by an alliance of far-right provocateurs, organised anti-vaxxers, and genuinely misguided people. I talked to many of these protesters, and I did not find a single one whose view on the vaccine mandate was purely based on a principled view of civil liberties – they all eventually said they thought the vaccine itself was dangerous. But it would be a mistake to think that it was only these seriously misguided people who were upset with the state of play at the start of 2022 – Aucklanders had put up with months of lockdown while the country got vaccinated, and a lot of Kiwis overseas had gone from an understanding sadness to full-on fury.\nIt is the period from about September 2021 onwards that deserves the most scrutiny. This was when we realised we couldn’t beat Delta and slowly started to dismantle the elimination strategy, introducing sweeping vaccine mandates as Auckland was on its way out of lockdown. This somewhat chaotic period – at one point there were three separate stages within one of the four separate alert levels – is where the clarity of hindsight is probably of the most use. Hopefully the Commission will use the unfair but necessary wisdom of hindsight to establish whether this period was messy by necessity, or because the Government didn’t adapt fast enough. Some idea of how much more chaotic the process of ending lockdowns in other countries was should be considered here, but we should not just rely on having done things better than our peers. Which is not to say that the Government’s continued efforts to at least delay widespread infection were misguided, or that the only thing that deserves scrutiny is whether it fought the virus too strongly. Indeed, it will also be very interesting to see what the Commission makes of New Zealand’s abandonment of much of its defences in 2022, something that has irked many who still see a place for widespread mask mandates as a low-intrusion way to stop the disease spreading. One expects that the inquiry will find less to really disagree with in 2020, when vaccines were not available and much about the virus was still not known. After all the elimination strategy was deeply popular during this period because it was working. It would be interesting to know just how much money was wasted on the “deep clean” of surfaces inside rooms that did nothing to kill what was an airborne disease, even well after this was established scientific fact, but I doubt such tallying up will feature. It’s also doubtful that the royal commission will plumb into the psychological shift some Kiwis went through, one which made them eager to exclude people from public spaces and to call the police if they saw their neighbours out for too many walks. Royal commissions are powerful things, accountable only to the monarch once they get going. Past ones have transformed our electoral system and the system of governance in our largest city. It is unlikely that this new royal commission will be able to end the debate on such a momentous period of history, but it will develop some lessons for next time. Hopefully by the time we need those lessons the worst wounds from this period will be long gone. Henry Cooke is former chief political reporter for New Zealand news organisation Stuff', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T02:13:43Z'}, {'id': '638f594d8f08cb34a8f54588', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s culture minister has called on the country’s western allies to boycott Russian culture, urging a halt to performances of the music of Tchaikovsky and other Russian composers until the end of the war. Writing in the Guardian, Oleksandr Tkachenko argues that such a “cultural boycott” would not amount to “cancelling Tchaikovsky”, but would be “pausing the performance of his works until Russia ceases its bloody invasion”. He argues that such a step is right given that the war is “a civilisational battle over culture and history” in which Russia is actively “trying to destroy our culture and memory” by insisting that the two states constitute a single nation. Many cultural figures in Ukraine have said the Russian state is actively instrumentalising its artistic heritage during the conflict. Billboards in Russian-occupied Kherson, for example, showed images of Pushkin, with text referring to the Russian poet’s link with the city. Tkachenko – a former TV executive who has been criticised in Ukraine for failing to step in to halt a controversial threatened reorganisation of the Dovzhenko Centre, Kyiv’s film centre and archive – also urged arts institutions not to soften in their resolve not to hire Russian artists who support the war. Ukrainian cultural figures are using the language of decolonisation to describe a process of separating themselves from a once-dominant Russian culture, one that was promoted while Ukrainian artistic expression was suppressed, sometimes violently, by the Russian empire and later the Soviet Union. Such events included the mass killing in 1937 of a generation of Ukrainian artists and writers, known as the “executed renaissance”. No Russian music is being performed in Ukraine at present. However, as the Christmas season approaches, with Nutcrackers the winter fare for ballet companies from New York to London, cultural leaders in the UK are stopping short of boycotting works from the Russian canon. “The presentation of great historic works such as The Nutcracker, performed by an international roster of dancers, should send a powerful statement that Tchaikovsky – himself of Ukrainian heritage – and his works speak to all humanity, in direct and powerful opposition to the narrow and nationalistic view of culture peddled by the Kremlin,” said a spokesperson for London’s Royal Ballet. He added that the company’s policy, for the duration of the war, continued to be that “we do not work with Russian state actors, such as the Bolshoi, nor individuals who have a clear association with the Putin regime in the Kremlin”. A spokesperson for English National Ballet, which is also staging a production of Tchaikovsky’s Nutcracker this Christmas, said that while the company “stands in solidarity with all those affected by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine”, its programme would go ahead as planned. Kathryn McDowell, the chief executive of the London Symphony Orchestra – which is performing programmes including Stravinsky and Rachmaninov in Germany under Sir Simon Rattle – said: “We continue to perform Russian music of the past.” She also noted that the orchestra continued to work with Russian artists “who are not identifying with the current leadership”. “While we at the Hallé abhor Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, and are not performing music or working with artists who support this illegal war we as Ukraine’s allies stand against the Russian state, not its people or its culture,” said David Butcher, the chief executive of Manchester’s Hallé Orchestra, whose upcoming programmes include works by Stravinsky and Shostakovich. “I don’t think it’s appropriate as a pioneering creative organisation to cancel, pause or self-censor, in our case, great music which deserves to be performed and heard.” A spokesperson for the BBC pointed to its programming of Ukrainian music and culture on Radio 3 and elsewhere, including a summer Prom featuring the Ukrainian Freedom Orchestra. “We continue to carefully look at programming linked to Russia, considering everything on a case by case basis,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T09:59:11Z'}, {'id': '63863bbe8f082ef70a24126f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Renee Bracey Sherman answers the phone and apologizes – is it OK if we speak while she drives? Like many abortion advocates, she tends to keep a packed schedule and talk at lightning speed – the next initiative, the next law, the next policy on the horizon. Ask advocates how they felt in June after the Dobbs decision sharply curtailed reproductive rights across the US, or in November after wins in the midterm elections signaled strong public support for abortion, and they’ll answer immediately: We knew this was coming; but the fight’s not over. What Bracey Sherman – founder and executive director of We Testify, a group focused on the leadership and representation of people who have abortions – and her colleagues in the pro-choice movement don’t spend much time doing is elaborating on the past, or how they mourned or celebrated, because it’s already in the rear-view window. Their eyes are laser-focused on the future. “We’re doubling down,” Bracey Sherman said. Abortion was a central issue in a midterm election that saw Democrats retain the Senate and relinquish only a narrow majority in the House. In Kentucky and Montana, voters rejected anti-abortion initiatives on the ballot; and in Michigan, California and Vermont, voters chose to establish reproductive rights in state law. Over the summer, Kansas voters similarly rejected a ballot measure to remove abortion rights from its constitution. “When abortion was on the ballot, it won, so that was fantastic,” said Elisa Wells, co-founder and co-director of Plan C, an organization that helps access abortion medication. Those wins “really demonstrate that legislators are out of touch with what the majority of Americans want. They support abortion access, and understand that it’s basic, common medical care.” So pro-choice advocates are taking the fight to new areas, principally access to abortion care, which is now heavily restricted in many places, and support for abortion seekers in states that have criminalized it. The focus is squarely on the states. For the next two years, with Congress divided, it’s understood that little will get done at the federal level. “The state level is probably where abortion rights advocates will need to work, and have had some success in the last year,” said Shana Kushner Gadarian, professor of political science at Syracuse University. Ballot initiatives were one of those real successes. It’s important for organizers “to get things directly in front of voters, because they seem to be winning on that side”, she said. They were successful in two ways. First, reproductive health can be an issue that stretches across partisan lines, with Democrats, Republicans and Independents alike voicing some level of support for abortion – especially when it comes to opposition to total abortion bans. But the Dobbs decision also drove a surge in voter registration, especially for Democrats, and it made abortion rights a more salient voting issue, even beyond ballot initiatives, Gadarian noted. That translated into results. Voters opposed anti-abortion candidates in several states: Arizona, Kansas, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin elected Democratic governors who could veto anti-abortion legislation, while Republicans in Arizona, North Carolina and Wisconsin failed to reach a supermajority in both the state senate and house, making it impossible to override such a veto. That’s a strong message to candidates in future elections. “Politicians care about re-election,” Gadarian said. “They want to make sure that they’re not going so far ahead of the public that they are going to get punished during the next election cycle.” That could mean instituting less-encompassing laws in conservative states, such as Florida’s 15-week restrictions, she said. Anti-abortion advocates went too far by creating state-level bans, which are extremely unpopular, and even pushing for a nationwide ban, said Bracey Sherman. “They overplayed their hand on everything.” There was also an unprecedented number of candidates and elected officials who were open about their own abortions – “a historic moment” for abortion support, she said. Advocates in at least 10 states with restrictive abortion policies are now considering ballot initiatives. In Oklahoma and South Dakota, abortion advocates have asked to add initiatives to 2024 ballots; while several key leaders in Missouri, which has a near-total abortion ban, are up for re-election in two years, and the state could also see ballot initiatives in 2024. New ballot initiatives could enshrine abortion rights into state law in New York, New Jersey and Ohio, a proactive move that several states have taken. In some states, citizens can put forth the proposals to be added to the ballot, or they may ask their state lawmakers to add them. Next in Kentucky is a legal challenge to the near-total abortion ban after six weeks that has no exceptions for rape or incest and that only allows abortions under a licensed physician’s care and if life-saving organs are threatened. Even if that challenge is successful, the next ban in place is on pregnancies after 15 weeks – so the fight would need to continue, advocates say. One important takeaway from places like Kansas, the first state to put abortion rights to a vote this summer, is that long-term community organizing and education was highly effective. Other grassroots organizations are taking note. The Afiya Center, a reproductive justice organization in Texas that had to stop its work as an abortion fund due to new state law, is focusing more on community mobilization, voter registration and education campaigns. “We are actually launching a voter engagement campaign at the top of the year, called ‘I am a reproductive justice voter,’” said Cerita Burrell, director of programs at the Afiya Center. “We need to educate folks more on the electoral process. It really comes down to policy and lawmakers – getting the right people in office that understand the right to full bodily autonomy.” Elsewhere, the pro-choice movement is not just entrenching but pushing as many laws as they can, “and they’re sticking”, Wells said. “So why don’t we go on the offensive?” Some groups are focusing on shield laws to protect providers who prescribe abortion medication via telehealth. In July, Massachusetts passed a sweeping law that shields providers who offer care to residents of states where it’s restricted. “With this new law in place, we’re helping get a group together of providers who would then be able to legally provide telehealth care into states that restrict access,” Wells said. Other states should do the same, she said. Plan C advocates for exactly that, as well as pushing to remove federal regulatory limitations on medication abortion. Some international organizations like AidAccess already ship to places where state law restricts abortion. Abortion pills are “safer than Tylenol, safer than Viagra – it doesn’t need to be as highly regulated and medicalized as it is”. Wells said. “Why are these restrictions still standing on this extremely safe and effective technology? It’s politics.” She would like to see abortion medications available over the counter. “Our philosophy has always been you really need to push the envelope and try these things, because they might stand up,” Wells said. Courtrooms, not coat hangers With medication and self-managed abortion, safety is not the concern it was in pre-Roe America. The current challenges are not about back-alley abortions and coat hangers, advocates say. “Self-managed abortion now does not look like what it looked like in the 70s,” said Jennifer Lim, the communications and media director of Indigenous Women Rising, a reproductive justice organization that runs an abortion fund. “We don’t lean in towards, ‘We won’t go back’, because we don’t have to – the future looks very different than what it used to. Abortion pills are very safe, they’re very effective. But the criminalization aspect is a whole different part of it.” Criminalizing pregnancy was a rising threat even before Roe was overturned, and the Dobbs decision could see prosecutions jump. So legal assistance in a rapidly changing and often confusing landscape has become a huge new area of focus. “We need to stop criminalizing people for their pregnancy outcomes,” Wells said. “We need to not have criminal charges falling on a person who needs healthcare in our country.” And those who have been marginalized – people of color, people living in poverty, gender-variant folks, younger people, immigrants – are the most likely to experience challenges like these. “It’s people who lack access and resources and face obstacles who are left with fewer options,” said Jill Adams, executive director of If/When/How, a legal resource for reproductive justice. The organization’s Repro Legal Helpline has seen a 14-fold increase in inquiries since the Dobbs decision. “We expect that higher level of interest to maintain, and we have been staffing up,” Adams said. The jumble of reproductive laws in the US is puzzling to anyone attempting to navigate care, Adams said, and many callers at first “need to understand what the legal landscape is – what, if any, legal risks they face so that they can make the decision that’s best for them,” she said. If/When/How also has a Repro Legal Defense Fund to provide financial assistance to people who have been criminalized for abortion, including partners, friends and family members. The fund supports pre-trial release, with bail bonds and bail alternatives, as well as the full costs of legal defense. More money is going into that, too, Adams said. Abortion was a “hot topic” in the midterm elections, with politicians relying on the issue to turn out voters, Lim said. “How do we get folks to stay engaged and understand that this is a long-term battle?” she asked. “We don’t want to lose momentum.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-06T15:21:04Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Yesterday was already looking difficult for the Conservative peer Michelle Mone. In the morning, she announced that she will take a “leave of absence” from the House of Lords to address allegations about her involvement in PPE Medpro, a medical supply business that she appears to have lobbied ministers to use, and from the profits of which she appears to have received millions. Meanwhile, the government decided not to oppose a Labour motion seeking to force the release of documents relating to a £200m government contract awarded to the company. But last night, new disclosures raised the pressure on Lady Mone again: a Guardian exclusive – which leads today’s paper – revealing that a second company she advocated for in an attempt to secure Covid contracts, LFI Diagnostics, was a secret entity of her husband Douglas Barrowman’s family office. Mone and Barrowman did not respond to a detailed request for comment on LFI Diagnostics, but earlier, her spokesperson said that she was seeking a leave of absence “in order to clear her name of the allegations that have been unjustly levelled against her”. There is no doubt that the story is complicated. But at its heart is a simple question: was public money spent responsibly on emergency PPE at the height of the pandemic – or subject to undue influence by the government’s political allies? Today’s newsletter, drawing on two years of dogged reporting by the Guardian’s David Conn and his colleagues, is a simple guide to a saga that is threatening to become a major scandal. Here are the headlines. Five big stories US politics | The Democratic incumbent, Raphael Warnock, has won the Georgia Senate runoff, delivering an important 51st seat to bolster his party’s majority in the chamber. Joe Biden described Warnock’s victory over the Donald Trump-endorsed Herschel Walker as a defeat for Republican extremism. Cop15 | The UN’s environment chief has warned that “we are at war with nature” and must “make peace”, as countries gather at Cop15 in Montreal to agree a deal to protect biodiversity. Draft targets include proposals to protect 30% of land and sea, repurpose billions in harmful subsidies and tackle invasive species. Conservatives | Rishi Sunak has signalled the end of a moratorium on new onshore wind projects in an attempt to head off a row with Tory MPs, his second U-turn in two days. The climbdown comes after pressure from backbenchers including Boris Johnson and Liz Truss. Strep A | Primary schoolchildren at risk from a severe form of strep A could be given preventive antibiotics as a blanket measure, in a move described as “rare” by health officials. At least nine children have died due to complications from strep A bacterial infections since September, but most infections are mild. China | China’s national health authority said on Wednesday that asymptomatic Covid-19 cases and those with mild symptoms can self-treat while in quarantine at home, the strongest sign so far that China is preparing its people to live with the disease. In depth: Who is Michelle Mone?\nWhen Michelle Mone was granted a peerage seven years ago, and appointed as David Cameron’s “entrepreneurship tsar” to lead a review of obstacles to business success for people from deprived backgrounds, it appeared to be the climax of an extraordinary triumph over adversity. Mone, who left school at 15 with no qualifications, had gone on to found the lingerie brand Ultimo. She eventually sold 80% of her stake in the company, which later went out of business. While some were sceptical of her credentials as a business role model, the Conservatives were delighted to have her. Iain Duncan Smith, then the work and pensions secretary, said: “I want Michelle to report back to me on how we can encourage people of all backgrounds to take up this entrepreneurial spirit.” *** What is PPE Medpro? When the pandemic began, PPE Medpro didn’t exist – but then an opportunity arose. In March 2020, facing severe shortages of crucial personal protective equipment for the NHS, the government decided to take emergency action: it dispensed with the usual competitive procurement process, designed to maximise value for money for the taxpayer, and instead allowed the awarding of contracts without competition at prices which a cabinet office memo disclosed in court (PDF) acknowledged “may be higher than would be expected in a regular market”. It also set up a “high-priority lane”, now often referred to as a “VIP lane”, to allow MPs, ministers and senior officials to refer would-be suppliers. Six weeks later, PPE Medpro was incorporated in the UK. One of its directors, Anthony Page, said that there was a “group behind PPE Medpro” with decades of experience in distributing medical products. But he declined to name them due to “confidentiality obligations”. Within weeks, PPE Medpro had contracts worth £203m to supply millions of masks and gowns for use in the NHS. It bought 25m sterile gowns from a Chinese manufacturer for £46m, and sold them on to the government for £122m. That meant PPE Medpro shared with three intermediary firms profits on that deal of up to £76m, minus shipping and logistics costs. No other companies bid for the contracts. Despite that significant expense, something went wrong: the gowns were rejected by the Department of Health and Social Care after a technical inspection. For the last 10 months, the DHSC has been trying to get its money back. PPE Medpro insists the gowns passed inspection and it is entitled to keep the money. *** How is Mone linked to PPE Medpro?\nDavid Conn has been reporting on the story for the last two years – you can hear an excellent episode of Today In Focus on his investigation here. His first story about PPE Medpro was published on 21 December 2020. In that story, he reported that two of the company’s directors, including Page, were linked to a tax advisory and wealth management firm in the Isle of Man run by Mone’s husband, Douglas Barrowman – and that Page had previously been the registered secretary for Mone’s personal brand company. But a lawyer for Barrowman and Mone claimed then that neither was an investor, director or shareholder in the company, and said in a statement: “Baroness Mone has never had any role or function in PPE Medpro, nor in the process by which contracts were awarded to PPE Medpro.” She has never declared the company on the Lords register of interests. In the time since, that story appears to have changed. This 23 November piece by Conn sets out the complicated history of statements on Mone and Barrowman’s behalf, and the established facts. While Mone’s lawyer said that “she did not benefit financially”, documents revealed by the Guardian last month indicate that Barrowman was paid at least £65m in profits, of which a trust benefiting Mone and her children secretly received £29m in October 2020. A lawyer for Mone said that she was “under no duty” to comment and could not do so for “a number of reasons”. A lawyer for Barrowman and PPE Medpro said that “there is much inaccuracy in the portrayal of the alleged ‘facts’ and a number of them are completely wrong”. Then there’s the question of what role Mone played in securing the contracts. After that initial claim that she played no part in the procurement process, a freedom of information request revealed that she had referred the company to government contacts via the VIP lane. Mone’s lawyer then said she had taken “the very simple, solitary and brief step of referring PPE Medpro as a potential supplier to the office of Lord Agnew”, then a cabinet office minister. But leaked emails suggest that she later lobbied Lord Bethell, a DHSC minister, to promote PPE Medpro’s Covid tests. The Sunday Times reported (£) that Mone tried to “bully and hector” Michael Gove and Lord Agnew to the extent that Gove reportedly called her “a right pain in the arse”. And in a serialisation of his diaries this week, former health secretary Matt Hancock said that she sent him an “extraordinarily aggressive email complaining that a company she’s helping isn’t getting the multimillion-pound contracts it deserves”. So far, Mone’s lawyers have not commented on that claim. In the new story reporting that a second company which Mone advocated for, LFI Diagnostics, was a secret entity of her husband’s family office, it is revealed that her lobbying prompted a letter from Bethell reminding her of “the need for propriety”. Mone and Barrowman did not respond to a request for comment on LFI Diagnostics. *** What happens now? Mone continues to say that the allegations against her are unfounded, and she intends to clear her name. If she does take a leave of absence from the House of Lords, it would mean that she is no longer bound by parliamentary rules to declare her interests. The House of Lords commissioner for standards is already investigating her over “potential breaches” of the Lords’ code of conduct. The commissioner could block her request for if he concludes she is trying to avoid that investigation – which cannot be finalised or published before the completion of a National Crime Agency probe into potential fraud at PPE Medpro which involved a raid on the mansion where Mone lives with Barrowman. Meanwhile, although the Conservative party has not removed the whip from Mone, it decided yesterday not to oppose a Labour motion that would force the release of documents relating to the PPE Medpro contracts – a move that protected its MPs from a potentially embarrassing vote. While in theory that means the paperwork will be released, health minister Will Quince indicated that it was likely to be delayed and redacted. Mone, for her part, has largely communicated through her lawyer – but last month, she may have made an elliptical reference to the story on social media. She posted an illustration on Instagram of a boy sitting on a pile of books, staring at the moon, next to the words: “Don’t believe everything you read, or everything you think.” What else we’ve been reading As reports of Strep A swirl around, it can be difficult to discern what’s true and what’s not. Devi Sridhar helpfully breaks down why this common infection is spreading and in some cases causing deaths in children. Nimo As the global biodiversity summit, Cop15, begins, this visual guide is a superb explainer of what’s at stake. One stark fact: “wildlife populations have plunged by an average of 69% between 1970 and 2018”. Archie Christopher Cherry and Maeve Shearlaw’s documentary on the cost of living crisis in North Tyneside is brilliant. They meet the women transforming a building in disrepair into a women-focused support centre to provide women in the local area with whatever it is they may need. Nimo Jim Waterson’s piece on coverage of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s forthcoming Netflix series is a helpful examination of a row already under way. He argues that “newspapers are turning a documentary about how the media treated the couple into a story about how the couple are treating the media”. Archie The music industry has always been at the whim of the technology that is en vogue. This New Yorker (£) piece explains how TikTok has been the latest vehicle for transformation in the industry – but is it a good thing? Nimo World Cup\nU2 puns abounded when Morocco’s goalkeeper Bono saved three penalties in a shootout against Spain to secure a place in the quarter-finals after a 0-0 draw. The result is the tournament’s most consequential shock yet, and Ben Fisher wrote that even Morocco’s manager Walid Regragui “kept tapping his head with both hands while on the run to join the party, as if to say: is this really happening?” The other last 16 match between Portugal and Switzerland was a more one-sided affair, but a 6-1 victory for Portugal overshadowed the fact that Cristiano Ronaldo was dropped. His replacement, 21-year-old Gonçalo Ramos, scored a hat-trick. Jonathan Liew wrote that Ramos left the stadium “with his life changed forever: a hat-trick and an assist, accomplished with the irrepressible confidence of a young man convinced the stage is his to own”. Meanwhile, you can sate your need for more build-up to England v France on Saturday with Jacob Steinberg’s account of how Gareth Southgate began his preparation for the game with a briefing on his opponents that has been in the works for the last two years. And here’s Tom Phillips in Boa Vista on how Brazil’s football fans have taken against Roy Keane after he criticised their team for dancing to celebrate their goals in Monday’s 4-1 victory over South Korea. “Roy Keane be damned,” wrote the sports columnist Julio Gomes. --- For all the latest on Qatar, from the scandal to the scores, sign up to Football Daily – our free, sometimes funny, newsletter The front pages\n“Mone lobbied for second firm with secret links to husband” – if you’ve read down this far, our Guardian splash headline should need no explanation. “Baroness Bra PPE bust-up” – that’s the strap line in the Metro, where the main headline is “Mone alone”. Its intro says the on-leave peer has been “abandoned” by the Tory party. The Financial Times leads with “Sunak pressed to speed up anti-strike legislation as industrial action surges” while the Daily Express says “Ambulance strike to put ‘lives at risk’” and the Telegraph has “Ambulance unlikely if you fall, elderly told”. The Daily Mail fumes: “Labour in hock to unions crippling Britain” and the Times says “Paramedics urged not to risk lives with strike”. The i reports “UK’s Strep A fightback may need extra antibiotics” while the Mirror has a devastating story, “Strep A took away my princess”, about the death of Stella-Lily McCorkindale, 5, from Belfast. “Eet eez coming ’ome” – some strange work in the Sun which took a waxwork of France footballer Kylian Mbappé, dressed it up as a Three Lions fan and turned it into a front page. Today in Focus\nWhat’s gone wrong with England’s water? More untreated sewage is being pumped into England’s seas and rivers than ever before. Sandra Laville follows the money to find out who is responsible Cartoon of the day | Martin Rowson\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nAmateur fossil hunters from outback Queensland have found the remains of a 100m-year-old being that palaeontologists are comparing to the Rosetta Stone because of its potential open up the discovery of new species of prehistoric marine giant. The discovery is significant because it would be the first time that an elasmosaur skull had been found connected to its body in Australia, meaning that now palaeontologists could decipher other fossils that are being held in museums. The Rock Chicks – the group that made the discovery – have given researchers the chance to answer questions that for a long time have completely eluded them. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword • This story was amended on 7 December 2022 to correct Douglas Barrowman’s name.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T08:29:10Z'}, {'id': '639026568f08cb34a8f54cdf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A New Zealand high court judge has ruled in favour of health authorities who sought guardianship of a baby boy after his parents refused to consent to a transfusion of “vaccinated blood” in a life-saving operation. The landmark decision, delivered on Thursday, is expected to have wide-ranging ramifications and has become a focus of protests for anti-vaxxers who held demonstrations outside the courtroom. The six-month-old known as Baby W will not survive without urgent surgery for a congenital heart defect. His parents said they were unwilling to proceed unless they were given a guarantee he would only receive blood from unvaccinated donors. New Zealand’s health authorities and blood service argued that allowing the parents to refuse vaccinated blood would set a dangerous precedent, in which patients could demand to pick and choose where their blood came from. The high court decision places the boy in the guardianship of his paediatric heart surgeon and cardiologist “for the purpose of consenting to surgery to address the obstruction and all medical issues related to that surgery, including the administration of blood” said Justice Ian Gault in a summary of the judgment. That guardianship will last from Wednesday until completion of his surgery and post-operative recovery – likely to be January 2023 at the latest. The parents will retain guardianship in all other matters. In previous interviews the parents said the baby needed surgery “almost immediately” but that they were “extremely concerned with the blood [the doctors] are going to use”. Vaccines to prevent severe disease and death from Covid-19 have been found to be extremely safe and effective, with billions of people around the world vaccinated. The judge noted that New Zealand’s blood service had presented evidence from the past six months of a “significant increase in potential blood recipients asking for blood from unvaccinated donors or asking about directed donation. Similar trends have been noted in other countries.” The case was filed by the Auckland health service Te Whatu Ora. In a statement last week, interim director Dr Mike Shepherd said: “The decision to make an application to the court is always made with the best interests of the child in mind.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-12T10:03:23Z'}, {'id': '638f26d48f0807b77be5f821', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Shed your sense of powerlessness, take to the street!” a man calls from a megaphone, his cry echoed by hundreds of demonstrators walking alongside him who repeat the chant. “Germany’s going to the dogs, wake up from your sleep!” Carrying banners and posters, some with strings of Christmas lights draped around their necks, banging drums, others holding blank pieces of paper out of sympathy with Chinese protesters banned from objecting to coronavirus lockdowns, the participants make their fears and anger known during a one-hour procession through the snow-sprinkled streets of the eastern German city of Halle. Their main concerns are soaring energy costs – they urge the government to repair and reopen the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Russia – inflation, which is at its highest level for 70 years, and the war in Ukraine, to which they believe Germany should not be contributing weapons. “This is a time to make your voice heard,” Manfred, an accountant, says. “Otherwise you are like a sheep just passively accepting all the shit that’s being thrown at you.” It is a Monday and for several years, Monday night protests – drawing attention to everything from the “over-Islamification” of Germany to “dictatorial” Covid prevention measures – have become a mainstay on the calendar of many German towns and cities in the former GDR or communist east.\nIn recent months, it is the cost-of-living crisis that has driven the agenda, with Germans in the east having been hit disproportionately hard by rising prices, owing to having lower wages, smaller pensions and less long-term accumulated wealth – whether property, inheritance or investments – than those in western Germany. Observers have watched with varying degrees of fascination and horror to see in some cases the far-right and far-left in effect join forces for the first time to voice their anger, as a “heiße Herbst” (hot autumn) has turned into what organisers and media refer to as a “Wut Winter” (angry winter). To what extent the collaboration was planned or not it is hard to say. But what has emerged is a growing sense of cooperation due to an overlap of issues, elegantly compared to a “horse shoe” shape (the ends of which curve towards each other). There are suggestions that there might even be the possibility of both camps – the far-right AfD and the far-left Die Linke, or breakaway elements of that party, Sahra Wagenknecht and her husband Oskar Lafontaine, the erstwhile Social Democrat finance minister – entering government together. Everyone is invited into the fold. “Have courage and join us, even if it’s just for a brief while,” a woman in an orange anorak says to onlookers through a microphone, speaking in time to the drum beat. A music teacher, who gives her name as Janine and does not want her employer to know she’s participating, says she feels empowered by the crowd. “The most important thing for me is that we’re all together, venting our frustration and worries, not sitting at home alone hugging hot-water bottles and wondering how on earth we’ll get through this winter, and then the next,” she says. Demonstrators’ demands to the government include dropping sanctions against Russia so that it is persuaded to resume its gas flows, doing away with coronavirus restrictions, a rent cap, “and an end to all the insanity”, the protest leader shouts shrilly, to cheers.\nThe protests are a throwback to 1989, when demonstrations by civil rights campaigners against the police state culminated in the peaceful fall of the Berlin Wall but many are offended by the comparison. In nearby Leipzig, they have hung banners from churches that were at the heart of the communist-era protests, reading: “2022 is not 1989 – we’re not living in a dictatorship”. The organisers disagree. They compare what they see as heavy-handed, top-down decisions by the state – whether regarding pandemic restrictions (mask-wearing rules are still in place in most parts of Germany) or the decision to place sanctions on Russia as punishment for its invasion of Ukraine – with the authoritarian rule in the GDR. The desire for “Selbstbestimmung” or “self-determination” is frequently expressed and has become something of a buzzword. Whereas in the past, Monday night demonstrators were more discerning about who they marched alongside, recent surveys show the barriers are down, with 67% in a recent survey saying it was “irrelevant” to them who had called the protest, the reasons for calling it were seen as more important. The attitude towards the protesters has also changed. In the not-too-distant past their demands were often interpreted as outrageous, or at best out of touch, but sympathy towards them is on the rise. In a recent poll by the broadcaster MDR, 80% said they could understand why people felt compelled to go out on to the streets. Protest numbers may have fallen since the government introduced emergency measures in October to dampen the effect of high energy and living costs (colder weather may also have put people off, organisers admit), but a passionate core is still using the opportunity to vent its anger. Others are deciding whether to join in. Standing by a camper van from which Glühwein is being dispensed and contemplating whether to join the protest or merely observe it from the sidelines, Johann Schroder asks: “Am I being radical if I decide to take part in a demonstration because I fear not being able to feed myself or heat my home – and what’s more … I don’t trust the powers-that-be to sort this out anytime soon, or come to that, to prevent war spreading to Germany?” He concludes: “Well, that is a perverse insinuation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-06T15:20:56Z'}, {'id': '638ffce18f0819dada4ee0b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Indonesia’s new criminal code limits the right to protest and participate in the public sphere, threatens the freedom of women and LGBTQ people and represents a trend of vague or “rubber” laws that are open to broad interpretation and selective implementation, experts have warned. With provisions restoring a ban on insulting the president, state institutions and state ideology, as well as extramarital and premarital sex, the code will come into effect within three years, following Indonesia’s 2024 elections. Insults to a sitting president can lead to up to three years in jail. The code was passed with support from all political parties in Indonesia’s parliament. Legislators hailed the vote as a decades-long effort to replace Dutch colonial laws that remained a deep part of the country’s judicial system. While the so-called “morality” laws governing sex outside marriage have worrying implications, academics and experts were most concerned by the provisions governing insults to the president, state institutions and national ideology.\n“What is being obscured by the discussion of the moralistic aspects is the fact that there is legislation that now that limits significantly the room for protests and criticism,” said Vedi Hadiz, professor of Asian studies and the director of the University of Melbourne’s Asia Institute. “We’ve seen that development take place over several years now, but this is the clearest signal that there is a consensus that this is the way that Indonesian democracy is going to develop beyond the next elections.” Ken Setiawan, a senior lecturer in Indonesian Studies at the University of Melbourne, said: “The provisions are generally broadly and vaguely formulated. And that really is a concern, because then it’s open to broad interpretation. It can be applied to anyone.” “This is a trend in Indonesian lawmaking. In Indonesian we call it pasal karet, which means ‘rubber clauses’.” Setiawan pointed out that the vagueness of the laws means that they can be selectively applied to particular individuals or groups. “When something is grey, or slippery, or nebulous,” said Eve Warburton, the director of Australia National University’s Indonesia Institute, it makes it difficult to know how an individual’s behaviour will be interpreted or where the boundaries are. “And I think that is precisely the point.” “Laws that criminalise political dissent or criminalise critiquing heads of state or government don’t have to be used in a systematic way, they can be used in a very ad-hoc, unpredictable way,” Warburton said. “The effect is the same: it intimidates opponents, it chills dissent, because it increases the risk of being thrown in prison for your political opinions.” Hadiz, too, believed the laws would be selectively implemented. “I don’t think that you’ll see mass crackdowns on civil society organisations, on the press and so on, but having the fear hover over your head that you can be penalised for what you say, what you do, certainly will constrain the behaviour of a lot of people.” Benjamin Hegarty, an anthropologist at Deakin University who studies gender and sexuality in Indonesia, said: “The laws consolidate several provisions at the regional level and these can be selectively applied to groups, including LGBT groups, in ways that can reduce scope for participation in the public sphere.” ‘Regulating the private sexual lives of its citizens’ Looking at how regional provisions had been applied could provide an insight into what Indonesia may look like in three years’ time when the laws come into effect. “What we’ve seen in regional regulations, and I think they’re a good test case of what’s to come, is that there haven’t been sweeping arrests or a focus on any specific group, but you’ve seen a narrowing of public space and the ability to participate in it.” The new laws mean that sex outside marriage will be punishable by a year in jail and cohabitation by six months. Charges can be based only on police reports lodged by a spouse, parents or children. Women will be more vulnerable than men to accusations of behaviour that is immoral, said Hadiz, and it was a setback to people of minority sexual orientation, “because according to the law they can’t be married”, and therefore cannot have sex at all. “If you’re the person whose partner has cheated on them, or whose child is gay, then it in a sense opens the door for you to report them to authorities,” said Hegarty. “Any law that sets out to regulate morality, and regulate the private sexual lives of its citizens, inevitably ends up being mostly about women and women’s sexuality, especially in very religious societies,” said Warburton, who added that women’s rights organisations in Indonesia were fearful that the laws could be used to intimidate and scare women wanting to report sexual harassment and assault. Setiawan pointed out that among the provisions in the code is one prohibiting the promotion of contraception, which raises the risk of unintended pregnancies. “Unintended pregnancies can affect a range of rights, including by ending a girl’s education and contributing to child marriage, as well as putting women and girls’ lives at risk and other health complications,” according to Human Rights Watch. “It’s interesting that they put this together with morality laws, as if to say, ‘We are building an Indonesia that is moral and pious and virtuous’,” said Hadiz, “So from that point of view, ‘We also have the kind of morality and virtue that you really shouldn’t doubt that we are above corruption and abuse of power’.” It was a “very cynical” way to package the laws, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-07T22:48:57Z'}]}