{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A little nerve-racking’: worry and scepticism in Bali over ban on sex outside marriage', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-08T01:27:38Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/08/a-little-nerve-racking-worry-and-scepticism-in-bali-over-ban-on-sex-outside-marriage', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Indonesia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Bali', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/bali'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 6, 'elements': [{'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Everything is expensive. Food is expensive, electricity and gas are expensive, rent and mortgages are expensive, transportation is expensive. But parents in the UK with children under the age of three are grappling with another rapidly rising cost: childcare. A report by the Guardian has found that childcare fees are expected to rise by as much as 19% in the new year. Sarah, an office worker from Somerset, told the Guardian that the rise in fees make her “feel sick”, saying: “Our electric bill has just ticked over in to a higher rate, already fuel and food bills are soaring, then the nursery fee goes up. I have no spare cash at the end of the month.” For years, those in the sector have been warning that early childcare provisions are on the brink of collapse. A recruitment crisis, chronic under-investment by the government and increasing costs have left the industry struggling to survive – inflation and the onrushing recession have only exacerbated the problem. The number of active providers in England has been steadily falling since 2015 and, like many other parts of the social infrastructure of this country, a lack of funding has meant that those left cannot pay staff much more than minimum wage (which the government has increased, while simultaneously making no increase to childcare subsidies). To make up the shortfall, many providers have raised their fees, making life more difficult for many families. I spoke to Guardian senior news reporter Alexandra Topping about the crumbling childcare sector and the long-term repercussions of not funding it properly. That’s right after the headlines. Five big stories Cumbria coalmine | Michael Gove has approved the UK’s first new coalmine in three decades at Whitehaven in Cumbria. The mine will create about 500 new jobs in the region and produce 2.8m tonnes of coking coal a year. It will also produce an estimated 400,000 tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions a year. Germany | Twenty-five people including a 71-year-old aristocrat, a retired military commander and a former far-right MP have been detained in Germany on suspicion of planning a terrorist plot to overthrow the state. Prosecutors said the accused followed the conspiracy theories of QAnon and the Reichsbürger (“empire citizens”) movement. Michelle Mone | The government had a responsibility to apply “basic standards” of procurement checks on PPE during the Covid pandemic, the auditor general will say, after scandals over supply, including those involving the peer Michelle Mone. Energy bills | A family of four were told they owed almost £1m to EDF for a year’s electricity and had £80,000 taken by direct debit, despite telling the company it was clearly incorrect. The payment put Richard Baron and his family more than £75,000 over their overdraft limit. Politics | The Conservatives have removed the whip from Julian Knight, the MP for Solihull in the Midlands, after a complaint was made to the Metropolitan police. No details of the complaint or what it relates to have been disclosed. In depth: How did things get so bad?\nThe most recent figures show that to place a child under the age of two in nursery full-time – 50 hours a week – costs on average more than £14,000 a year in the UK (in London, it is £19,000 a year). In England full-time nursery costs almost two-thirds of a parent’s weekly take-home pay. For many, these costs are as much, or more, than their rent or mortgage. Paying so much for something as essential as childcare has caused widespread anger among parents – in October, thousands across the country marched to urge the government to reform the childcare sector and parental leave. How did things get so bad? *** A crisis years in the making While the government may point to the exceptionally difficult economic situation the country, and the world, is in to explain the crisis, the problem is far more entrenched. “Childcare in this country has never been properly funded,” Alexandra explains. And the help the government does give is often inadequate. In 2017, the government introduced 30 hours of free childcare a week for three- to four-year-olds during school term time for parents who work full-time. “It was welcomed by parents,” says Alexandra. “It makes a massive difference and it feels as if you’re getting a huge pay raise when your kid hits three.” But the picture is more complicated: approximately 95% of nurseries say that the government’s funding of these “free” hours do not cover their costs, according to the National Day Nurseries Association (NDNA). Over the last decade, the gap between what the subsidy provides and what the care costs to give has been growing wider. “The government has told providers that they can’t charge top-up fees to cover this gap but what nurseries may do is charge £10 a day for ‘extras’ like nappies and snacks,” Alexandra says. As a result of this squeeze, 4,000 early-years providers have closed in the last two years. Additionally, the removal of ring-fencing for early-years childcare in councils has meant that many local authorities have been under-spending or reallocating funding intended to deliver childcare. A report by the NDNA said that at least £55m of early-years funding had not been spent on its intended area. *** Comparatively expensive In Germany, children have a legal right to childcare, and prices range from €70 to €150 per child a month (and an increase in child benefits is due to kick in the new year). France, meanwhile, offers state-funded creches for children from two-and-a-half months old and Norway offers kindergarten to children between one and five. Most of these countries can provide high-quality childcare because of heavy state investment. “One of the rallying cries of the childcare sector is that you have to see investment in childcare the same way that you see investment in bridges or in the railway,” Alexandra says. “It not only enables parents to go back to work, it’s also incredibly important for the population of the future: the first 1,000 days of a child’s life is so important for brain development.” *** Impacts The spiralling cost of childcare has meant that many people cannot afford to work. Women comprise 84% of the 1.75 million people who have given up work to care for their family, and this number is rising. Alexandra has spoken to some people who have stopped working when faced with mounting bills: “When they did the sums, it didn’t make sense to pay for childcare because it basically wiped out their salary.” And this does not take into account the kind of support a family with a disabled child needs, where provision is even more scarce and expensive. Taking a career break has a myriad of side effects though. “That person who steps back from the workforce does not pay tax, so it’s bad for the economy, they don’t put money into their pension, so it’s bad for their financial security – and it’s terrible for their career progression,” Alexandra says. Unsurprisingly, this has disproportionately negative impacts on women’s career and wage outcomes. *** What could be done The arguments for affordable and decent childcare are obvious. A survey by the Centre for Progressive Policy (pdf) found that if women were able to access affordable childcare, and therefore worked the hours they wanted, their collective earnings would increase between £7.6bn and £10.9bn a year. It also improves social mobility and a child’s emotional and social development. But there does not seem to be the political appetite for such solutions, says Alexandra. “Both parties want to discuss childcare, as it is an important issue for many voters, but they’re just tinkering around the edges – there’s no real desire to get to grips with the scale of the problem.” Tinkering isn’t enough: campaigners, childcare workers and parents are all calling for a radical overhaul and significant investment so that the system does not collapse altogether. If it does, the knock-on consequences for the economy could be huge. What else we’ve been reading\nSociologist Linsey McGoey draws two interesting lessons from the Michelle Mone affair (pictured above): the value of “strategic ignorance” for politicians, and how difficult that makes it to draw the right lessons from the PPE supply crisis. “By turning a blind eye to relentless profiteering … the problem of corporate predation is minimised,” she writes. Archie Catherine Donnelly writes vividly about her grandmother who, for years, told her many stories of her life in the working-class town of Peterborough, Ontario. Once she died, Donnelly was confronted with a transformed understanding of how history is written and remembered by those without much power. Nimo Joanne Harris warns that a career writing books has become impossible for all but a narrow tranche of the most fortunate writers, with the gender pay gap growing to a vast 41% and Black and mixed-heritage authors earning 51% less than white ones. The median income is dismal: £7,000 a year. Archie Felicity Cloake has come through for veggies (or those who don’t enjoy eating copious amounts of meat) with this nut roast recipe. I will definitely try it out this weekend. Nimo I did not expect to read William Shatner on how much he loved going to space and why he cares about the Cop15 summit in the Guardian yesterday, but here he is, explaining how his trip made him realise the importance of preserving Earth’s biodiversity. Archie Sport Football | Vivianne Miedema’s first-half volley made the difference in a tight game, as Arsenal Women triumphed against Juventus Women 1-0. The victory brings them within three points of qualifying for the Women’s Champion’s League knockout stages. The front pages\nThe Guardian leads with “Gove ignores climate warnings to approve first coalmine in 30 years”, as the levelling up secretary gives the go-ahead to the project that will produce an estimated 400,000 tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions a year. The Mail says “It’s beginning to look a lot like… an Xmas general strike,” while the Telegraph reports on “Army fury as soldiers ordered to give up Christmas over strikes”. The Times leads with, “Christmas flights hit by airport walkouts”. The Financial Times says “Xi’s zero-Covid controls loosened as evidence mounts of damage to trade”. The i splashes with “Hancock forced out after local Tories revolt against their absentee MP”. The Mirror focuses in on the former health secretaries reality TV career with, “Hancock: get me out of here”. The Sun looks ahead to England’s quarter-finals World Cup match, tracking down the second cousin of France’s star player with the headline: “Kylian Mbappe lives in Leicester.. and yes, he does support 3 lions”. Today in Focus\nWhy are so many workers going on strike in Britain? From hospitals to buses to the postal service, the impact of wide-ranging industrial action is already being felt, but how much worse could things get? Nosheen Iqbal speaks to striking workers who explain why they feel so passionately, while Heather Stewart explains how rising inflation is complicating negotiations between employers and staff. Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nWhen the pandemic forced Matthew Conridge to close up the video game bar he was running in Devon, he decided to pivot to a related field: restoring old arcade machines. After starting small, his company, Play Leisure, now has 200-odd arcade machines crammed into a space about the size of a tennis court, and a constant demand from collectors nostalgic for the coin-ops of their youth. “We just sold an Addams Family pinball machine for £10,000 – that would have been chucked in a skip 15 years ago,” Matt says. “People didn’t expect anyone would want them.” And while he works painstakingly to get derelict machines back in action, he doesn’t seek cosmetic perfection. “When we went into arcades as children, the machines would have cigarette burns – that’s how you remember them. There’s a certain charm to that.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword --- In yesterday’s email, the first paragraph said that Michelle Mone’s husband was John Barrowman. It is, of course, Douglas Barrowman – as it went on to say later in the piece. We apologise for the error.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T07:03:05Z'}, {'id': '639109168f08d2809ffd0928', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Qatar’s longest-lasting legacy following the World Cup won’t be football or even its human rights record – it will be the climate crisis, according to a new report warning that its huge expansion of gas extraction could push the planet into catastrophic global heating. Should Qatar exploit all of its oil and gas reserves it will eventually add an enormous 50bn metric tons of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere once burned, which is more than the entire annual emissions of the whole world, the new research, shared with the Guardian, has found. This vast output of emissions will in itself push the world beyond the internationally agreed limit of 1.5C of global heating beyond industrial times, beyond which scientists warn there will be increasingly disastrous impacts from heatwaves, droughts, floods and biodiversity die-offs. QatarEnergy, the state-owned petroleum operation that is overseeing a huge escalation in the country’s oil and gas output, is a sponsor of the World Cup currently under way in Qatar. Fifa, which has been accused of falsely claiming the World Cup will be carbon neutral, has featured QatarEnergy in sponsorship slots in stadiums and online even as the global football body launched a campaign called #SavethePlanet in which it warned the climate crisis “threatens the essential ingredients of good health” and causes “increasing destructiveness of extreme weather events”. Qatar’s vast oil and gas resources have greatly enriched the small Middle Eastern country, which this year became the world’s largest exporter of liquified natural gas (or LNG), superseding the US and Australia. It is now looking to further cement its position by ramping up production from a vast offshore gas deposit called the north field, which will account for 70% of the emissions growth according to the new report by BankTrack, an NGO that used data from BP to ascertain the extent of Qatar’s “carbon bomb” projects. The emissions from Qatar’s oil and gas resources will cause $20tn in damages and 11m deaths around the world, BankTrack said, citing calculations based upon recent research looking at the economic and mortal cost of fossil fuels. QatarEnergy has signed recent partnership deals with western oil giants including Shell, Total, ConocoPhilips, Exxon and Eni in order to boost output of the north field by 60% over the next five years. Separate deals have been struck in the past month with Germany and China to provide the countries with gas amid concerns over supplies disrupted by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Saad Sherida al-Kaabi, Qatar’s energy minister and chief executive of QatarEnergy, said last month Qatar will “provide reliable and credible LNG supply solutions to customers across the globe”. No new fossil fuel infrastructure can be built if the world is to avoid breaching the 1.5C limit, the International Energy Agency has warned, but despite this there has been plenty of financial support for Qatar’s gas expansion. JPMorgan Chase, Citi, HSBC, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, MUFG, Credit Suisse and Bank of America have all backed planned projects in the north field, providing nearly $12bn in bond underwriting services to QatarEnergy. “There’s a massive amount of emissions about to come from oil and gas taken from Qatar, although there hasn’t been much attention to it until now,” said Henrieke Butijn, climate campaigner and researcher at BankTrack. “What’s happening in Qatar is awful in terms of these projects and also worker conditions, but there is a level of hypocrisy here because Qatar isn’t acting alone. “Fifa selected Qatar for the World Cup and chose QatarEnergy as one of the main sponsors, even while they push their own climate campaign. And banks which have made net zero emissions commitments all know what they are doing when they are underwriting QatarEnergy. These banks need to cut off any finance that isn’t aligned with the 1.5C goal.” At the recent UN Cop27 climate summit in Egypt, the world’s governments again committed to keeping below 1.5C, although emissions reduction pledges currently fall drastically short of meeting this target. While wind and solar energy deployment is growing rapidly – clean energy is set to overtake coal as an energy source globally by 2025 – the world is still teeing up vast quantities of fossil fuels that would push societies into climate meltdown should they be burned. A huge 3.5tn tons of greenhouse gas emissions will be emitted if governments allow identified reserves of coal, oil and gas to be extracted and used, a recent released in September found. Qatar’s 50bn tons of emissions will occur if it allows all of its deposits to be burned. While this may not happen if other countries move decisively away from fossil fuels as an energy source, there is currently no commitment from Qatar that it won’t completely exhaust its reserves. In previous years there have been claims Qatar’s gas reserves could last more than 130 years. QatarEnergy was contacted for comment on the research. On its website, the state-owned body states that the climate crisis is “one of the most critical issues of our times and requires prompt and dedicated action at a global scale”. “Fossil fuels are weapons of mass destruction, carbon bombs ticking against the time we have left to avert the very worst of the climate crisis,” said Harjeet Singh, head of global political strategy at Climate Action Network International. “Fossil fuel companies, the banks that fund them and the governments that support them are complicit in the suffering of millions. It is time to strip them off their social and economic licenses and make them pay up for climate damages.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T13:49:51Z'}, {'id': '639151548f08d2809ffd0b43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A New Zealand high court judge has ruled in favour of health authorities who sought guardianship of a baby boy after his parents refused to consent to a transfusion of “vaccinated blood” for a life-saving operation. The landmark decision, delivered on Wednesday, is expected to have wide-ranging ramifications and has become a focus of protests for the anti-vaxxer movement, which held demonstrations outside the courtroom. Have there been similar cases elsewhere? In a similar case earlier this year, an Italian court ruled against the parents of a two-year-old boy who demanded that doctors use blood transfusions only from unvaccinated donors. The boy required urgent heart surgery. The parents of the two-year-old put forward a list of 40 unvaccinated people who were willing to donate their blood but similarly to New Zealand, Italy’s blood service told the court that using the blood of unvaccinated people had no scientific basis because the vaccine was not transmitted with the transfusion. Medical professionals in places such as the US and Canada have reported patients requesting unvaccinated blood, and last month the UK government rejected a petition asking it to create a separate blood and organ service for those who did not receive the Covid-19 vaccination. In New Zealand there has been a “significant increase in potential blood recipients asking for blood from unvaccinated donors or asking about directed donation”, the blood service told the court, and noted the trend in other countries. When can a New Zealand court impose medical guardianship? The court has the power, under the Care of Children Act 2004, to appoint a guardian either generally or for a particular purpose – including appointing a doctor as an agent of the court for the giving of consent to medical treatment involving blood transfusion – as long as the welfare and best interests of a child are given “paramount consideration”. In this case, justice Ian Gault gave the baby’s paediatric heart surgeon and cardiologist guardianship “for the purpose of consenting to surgery to address the obstruction and all medical issues related to that surgery, including the administration of blood”. That guardianship will last until completion of his surgery and post-operative recovery – likely to be January 2023 at the latest. The parents will retain guardianship in all other matters. Have there been other similar decisions in New Zealand? This case appears to be the first in New Zealand about blood transfusions and the Covid-19 vaccine, but there have been cases in the past 10 years where the courts have stepped in, mostly in connection with parents’ religious beliefs. In 2013, the 10-month-old daughter of a Jehovah’s Witness couple was put into the guardianship of the high court for nine months so doctors could give her life-saving cancer treatment. A case a year earlier reached a similar conclusion after the Jehovah’s Witness parents of a two-year-old girl would not consent to the kidney and liver transplant she needed because of the use of transfused blood, which is contrary to their faith. In 2015, a father refused medicine for his HIV-positive child because he believed it would kill his child. The court ruled in favour of the clinicians. What are legal and ethical experts saying about the case? A medical lawyer and former nurse, Rebecca Keenan, told broadcaster RNZ on Thursday that Gault had carefully weighed up the decisions of the family against standard medical practice and had followed well-established laws. “The court will focus solely on the child … and they have put the child firmly first and have gone by the evidence and supported the health board,” Keenan said. University of Otago bioethics lecturer Josephine Johnstone also told RNZ that while this may seem like a “very 2022 case” in Covid times, the decision was in line with previous similar cases. “It is consistent with previous cases around the refusal of blood products for children whose parents are Jehovah’s Witnesses … or refusal of medical care for cancer treatment for children whose parents have alternative health and science views,” she said. “In very rare cases, where it’s a life-and-death situation, we can expect the courts to step in – and that’s exactly what happened.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T05:31:54Z'}, {'id': '638dc40e8f08ec68b60189ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Even before the cost of living crisis was formally pronounced, it had arrived in Greece. For many it was not in the increased number of homeless on the streets, or beggars huddled around tourist sites, or eye-wateringly high energy bills – although all of those existed before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. “It was there for everyone to see on the supermarket shelves,” says Panagiota Kalapotharakou, who heads the consumer rights association Ekpizo. “Eighteen months ago there were so many products with price labels that a great number of Greeks could not afford. Costs were going up long before the war in Ukraine.” It came as little surprise for consumer groups, then, that when talk turned to the need for relief measures to counter rising inflation the government chose to focus on staple goods. What emerged was the novel concept of the “household basket”: supermarkets agreed with the government to sell about 51 staples – from flour to fish – at fixed prices. The measure, thrashed out around a long mahogany table in the ministry of commerce, went into effect in early November. Officials in the centre-right government intend the scheme, scheduled to run to the end of the winter, as a bulwark for the most vulnerable against the inflationary storm. No government subsidies are involved. “We spent weeks sitting around this table working on it with supermarket market representatives and our competition committee,” says Sotiris Anagnostopoulos, the ministry’s fresh-faced general secretary. “In politics you have to anticipate what is coming next. The cost of living crisis is a huge challenge, maybe the biggest we have faced since the adoption of the euro.”\nNationwide chains have signed up to the programme, selling products under blue household basket labels. With the country’s annual consumer inflation rate currently at 10% – down from a high of 12% in September – the government insists the initiative has succeeded in stabilising prices at a time of uncertainty and, in some cases, driving them lower. “What was never expected was the price war that we have seen among the big supermarket chains,” says Anagnostopoulos. “It’s been a surprise and a pleasant one because in general Greeks have much lower purchasing power.” Forced to survive on some of the lowest wages in the EU – at less than €1,200 a month, the average monthly salary is about a quarter of that in Germany – Greeks have felt the impact of soaring prices perhaps more than other EU nations. Rising prices were recently found to be the single biggest problem facing the administration of the prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, by the polling company Marc. The survey, conducted in late November, showed that close to 60% of respondents did not believe the “household basket” could contain inflationary pressures in a market where regulatory practices have traditionally been weak. “To be honest it’s a bit of a nonsense, not that I’d want to say that openly as I’m a public sector employee,” said a woman browsing the shelves of a supermarket close to the ministry where she works. “It’s very much aimed for those on low incomes. It has things you’d never want to buy, like this coffee in a tin for example.” It’s a sentiment shared at the consumer group Ekpizo. “For the vast majority it hasn’t been the least bit beneficial,” says Kalapotharakou. “And part of the problem is that we still have some of the highest prices in Europe for basic services like the internet. People are really struggling.” The scheme is the latest in a series of relief measures published in a country where citizens and unions are not shy to protest. Greece was among the first EU member states to subsidise energy bills, spending an estimated €13bn to cushion the impact of soaring costs for households and small businesses. The aid, proportionate to GDP, is among the biggest in the bloc. Heating allowances for the most vulnerable have been expanded while the finance ministry has said that as of next year pensions will also be increased along with the minimum wage. A 5% reduction on municipal taxes has also been announced. Had Greece not endured a decade of fiscal belt-tightening on account of its prolonged debt crisis, analysts agree it might have been better placed to cope with the challenges ahead. “There are a lot of legacies that we’ve carried with us since the debt crisis,” says Nick Malkoutzis, editor at the political analysis site Macropolis. “Perhaps the most significant are the low incomes and pensions which had already made life difficult for the average family and are now exacerbated by the cost of living crisis.” In terms of public spending, the government had pulled “most of the levers” available to offer relief in the months ahead, he says. “It’s clear that it realised early on that energy prices in Greece are higher than in most EU countries, and that if it didn’t act a financial problem could become a political problem.” But is it enough? At his stand in an Athenian neighbourhood farmer’s market Nikos Papayiannis, who sells eggs from his native Megara, wasn’t sure. “You get all these middle-class types bartering over the price of eggs,” he sighed, counting his earnings for the day. “There’s always been a bit of it but never to this extent. Let God be with us this winter because who knows what it will bring.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T11:13:20Z'}, {'id': 'c2160840-c413-4f4b-bc7b-f1d5278794ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One of the bomb makers in the 2002 Bali attacks that killed more than 200 people has been released on parole, despite the opposition of Australia’s prime minister, who described him as “abhorrent”. Umar Patek, a member of the al-Qaida-linked Jemaah Islamiyah, was jailed for 20 years in 2012 after he was found guilty of mixing bombs that ripped through two Bali nightclubs, killing 202 people, including 88 Australians. The Australian government said many Australians would be “deeply hurt” by Patek’s release, adding that it had “sought assurances from the Indonesian government that he will be subject to ongoing supervision and monitoring”. “Today our thoughts are with the victims and survivors of the Bali bombings and their families,” a spokesperson for the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said. “We have registered our concerns about Umar Patek’s release with the Indonesian government on multiple occasions.” The Australian minister for home affairs, Clare O’Neil, who visited Indonesia earlier this week, said the Australian government had “put in the strongest possible terms our views about what has occurred, and we have done that clearly”. O’Neil said it was a “horrible” day for families of the victims and described Patek’s actions as “inexcusable and completely abhorrent”. Patek, 55, whose real name is Hisyam bin Alizein, was released from prison in the East Java city of Surabaya at 8am on Wednesday (1am GMT) and was escorted by authorities as no one from his family came to pick him up. “He is obliged to follow the office’s guidance and must not commit any violence to keep his parole,” said Rika Aprianti, a spokesperson for the Corrections Department at the justice ministry. Patek was sentenced to 20 years in prison a decade after the bombing but received a total of 33 months of sentence reductions, which are often given to prisoners on major holidays. Most recently, he was granted a five-month reduction on 17 August, Indonesia’s Independence Day. That meant he had fulfilled the parole requirement of serving two-thirds of his current sentence, Aprianti said. Authorities believe the convicted extremist has “shown changes” after undergoing a deradicalisation programme, according to the official. “Most importantly, he has pledged allegiance to the unitary state of the Republic of Indonesia,” she said. But experts have warned that releasing Patek and his fellow Bali bomber Ali Imron – who is serving a life sentence – could boost their notoriety upon release. Australia lost the most of any of the 21 countries whose nationals were killed. The Australian prime minister, Anthony Albanese, said in August he had nothing but “contempt” and disgust for Patek’s actions, saying his early release would only renew distress and trauma for the victims’ grieving families. Patek was captured in 2011 after nearly a decade on the run with a $1m bounty on his head in Abbottabad, the same Pakistani town where Osama bin Laden was killed by US special forces. The West Jakarta district court concluded that Patek had played an important role in building a car bomb that was detonated by another person outside the Sari Club in Kuta, moments after a smaller bomb in a backpack was detonated by a suicide bomber inside the nearby Paddy’s Bar nightclub. The attacks killed 202 people – mostly foreign tourists – including 88 Australians, leaving a deep scar in that country.\nDuring the trial, Patek admitted he had helped make the bombs, but said he had not known how they would be used. He was spared the death sentence after collaborating with the police and apologising to the victims’ families. Patek recently claimed that it was a “mistake” to become involved in the 2002 attacks, and alleged he had opposed the plan. In a video apparently filmed inside Porong prison, he said: “I didn’t come to Indonesia to join the Bali bomb project. Even when I found out about it I was so against it, I disagreed with it. I asked the others at the time, what were the reasons for the attack plan. There were no reasons.” The attacks on a nightclub and bar were the deadliest in Indonesian history and led to a crackdown on extremism in the country, which has the largest Muslim population in the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T03:47:48Z'}, {'id': '639125108f08aedcdc7df59d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Indonesia’s plan to auction the development rights to an entire archipelago of more than 100 tropical islands has descended into chaos, with a fisheries ministry official joining conservationists in criticising the sale. Sotheby’s has described the uninhabited pristine Widi Reserve as “one of the most intact coral atoll ecosystems left on Earth”, and is due to open bidding on Thursday. No sale price has been stated, but prospective buyers will need to provide a US$100,000 deposit. However, Victor Gustaaf Manoppo, director general of marine spatial planning at the fisheries ministry, disputed whether the appropriate approvals had been granted to operate in the marine-protected zone in the “Coral Triangle” area of eastern Indonesia.\nThe sale of islands to non-Indonesians is banned under Indonesian law, so buyers must bid for shares in PT Leadership Islands Indonesia (PT LII), an Indonesian development firm that has licensed the rights to build an eco-resort and luxury residential properties on the reserve. Manoppo said PT LII lacks full approval from the central government to manage the reserve. “Based on our information, PT LII does not currently have [marine activity approval] for the utilisation of the Widi islands’ waters,” he told a press conference this week. “According to our legal regulations, the Widi islands cannot be owned by foreigners and cannot be traded.” Conservationists say the development could cut off local communities and threaten its ecosystems, which feature rainforests, mangroves, lagoons, lakes and coral reefs that are home to vast marine life. Afdillah Chudiel, a campaigner at Greenpeace, welcomed the stance from the fisheries ministry, saying that it should “act decisively to enforce the rules prohibiting the sale and purchase of islands, which are public rights and state assets”. “[Widi Reserve’s] utilisation must prioritise benefits for coastal communities and traditional fishermen around the island, not for a group of rich people and investors,” he said. Home affairs minister Tito Karnavian has defended the sale, telling critics that the firm PT LII was simply trying to raise a capital investment. “The aim is not to auction [Widi Reserve],” CNN Indonesia quoted Karnavian as saying. “The aim is to attract foreign investors, so that’s fine.” PT LII stated that the sale would go ahead as planned at Sotheby’s Concierge Auctions in New York on 8-14 December. It defended the sale, saying in a statement: “What LII has is the exclusive licensed rights to conserve, sustainably develop, and manage the Widi Reserve with over 30 licenses, permits, approvals and government recommendations in hand.” Sotheby’s has previously addressed the environmental concerns. Charlie Smith, Sotheby’s Concierge Auctions’ executive vice-president, told the Guardian via email that PT LII would be “actively involved, not just handing over the entire project”. He said the company’s plan touches “less than 1% of the rainforest” and “0.005% of the entire reserve”, with no-go areas for tourists and spaces that cap the number of guests. Spread out over 10,000 hectares (25,000 acres) north-east of Bali, a Sotheby’s representative described the islands as “an animal kingdom of epic proportions, home to hundreds of rare and endangered species,” among them blue whales, whale sharks and “species yet to be discovered”. Included in the development plans is a private airstrip that can serve guests from destinations such as Bali, Jakarta, and Cairns.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T01:46:54Z'}, {'id': '63912ca08f08aedcdc7df5da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As the sun rose over Canggu, one of Bali’s most popular beach fronts, the mood on Wednesday felt calm. Like any other day in paradise, the water was packed with early morning surfers and the sand littered with beach-goers. This morning, however, was different. One day earlier, Indonesia’s parliament confirmed that sex outside marriage would be outlawed in a draconian overhaul of the country’s criminal code. The reforms, which are expected to take effect in three years, will include a ban on cohabitation between unmarried couples and would apply to Indonesians and tourists. The news has triggered a backlash from rights activists and prompted protests in Jakarta. However, the reactions at one of Indonesia’s most visited tourist destinations ranged from scepticism to concern.\n“These rules were proposed a few years ago, and it didn’t happen … so I don’t know if the government will really implement this,” Santi Aprilia, an Indonesian housewife, tells the Guardian. “Indonesia needs tourists to come, but what if foreigners that aren’t married want to come here? I think it’ll be hard to implement this kind of rule,” she says. A Balinese surf teacher who identified himself as Tony, 28, was similarly sceptical that the criminal code would affect Bali. “I don’t think it’s going to happen because in Indonesia there’s not only Muslims but all religions,” he says. Tourism fears While Indonesia, the world’s third-largest democracy, is a majority-Muslim country, the dominant religion in Bali is Hinduism. Bali has also emerged as a liberal enclave in recent decades, spurred by the more than 300,000 tourists a month that usually visit the island, according to the latest census. Tourism, however, is also a point of concern triggered by the announcement. Putu Slamet, 24, is a local driver who feels tourism could be negatively affected by the new rules. Due to marry next year, he doesn’t live with his partner but knows it might be a deterrent for young couples from overseas. “If they come here and can’t have sex before marriage they’ll think again about coming to Bali or even Indonesia,” he said. Slamet’s concerns are echoed by others working in tourism on Bali’s southern coast. “I have a couple of guests already talking about it,” says the manager of a tourist hostel, Michelle Setiawan. She was previously put off visiting the Indonesian island of Lombok after she was asked to show proof of her relationship. Setiawan is also unsure how such a ban will be enforced. “I feel like it doesn’t make any sense,” she says. “I understand because it’s a majority Muslim [country], but there are non-Muslims here as well so it’s not fair.” ‘Stepping back in time’ As for the island’s expat community, it was another day in the remote office. However, similar conversations about the new rules crept up. “I feel a bit sorry for Bali because it feels like it’s stepping back in time,” 37-year-old travel blogger, Christina Jerger, says. A fan of the film Eat, Pray, Love, she felt the news showed Bali in a different light.\nThe newly revised version of the criminal code specifies that only parents and children will be able to report sexual activity to the authorities. However, uncertainty about enforcement remains a talking point. Jerger adds: “It depends on how they operate after that, and how they check it. I would not say it does not affect me at all, I’m still thinking about it.” For couples whose parents could report them, it’s a sobering reality. An Australian resident living with his Indonesian girlfriend who asked to remain anonymous “because of the law”, says he is “a bit nervous.” “Obviously there’s so many great things to living in Bali … but stuff like that hanging over your head is a little nerve-racking. Probably because of my girlfriend and friends, it seems more of a concern for Indonesians.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:48:30Z'}, {'id': '639124da8f08aedcdc7df59b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has vowed to review a contract awarded to a Beijing-linked firm to supply and maintain federal police radio equipment, citing possible security concerns. The half-million dollar contract for a radio frequency filtering system to prevent eavesdropping went to Canada’s Sinclair Technologies, which is controlled by China’s Hytera Communications. The Shenzen-based company is partly owned by the Chinese government and blacklisted by the United States – raising concerns about potential Chinese access to Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) communications. “I find it disconcerting,” Trudeau told a news conference on the sidelines of a biodiversity conference in Montreal co-hosted by Canada and China.\nHe noted that while Canadian security agencies have warned about “foreign interference in our institutions and our structures”, here officials are “signing contracts that have questionable levels of security for our operations and our national security institutions like the RCMP.” “We’re going to be following up on this,” he vowed, promising to ensure that communications technology used by the government and its agencies is secure. The government must also “make sure that Canada is not signing contracts with the lowest bidder that then turn around and leave us exposed to security flaws”, he said.\nThe US Federal Communications Commission banned Hytera in 2021, saying it was among several Chinese firms that pose a national security risk. Huawei is on the same US list, and has been banned by Canada too. Hytera also faces accusations – which it denies – of conspiring to steal trade secrets from US telecommunications company Motorola Solutions. A Public Services and Procurement Canada spokesperson said the department did not take security concerns and Sinclair’s ownership into consideration during the bidding process, Radio-Canada reported. In a written statement, Martine Cardozo, sales director for Sinclair Technologies, said the company was independently registered and operating in Canada and its products were trusted by public safety experts globally. The RCMP also said it was confident that the system, which was already being installed, would remain secure. However, opposition conservative leader Pierre Poilievre said it was “astonishing” that the deal took place and insisted that the contract must be cancelled. “It is astonishing to me that Justin Trudeau’s contracting system would have allowed a company whose parent owner in the United States is charged with 21 different espionage offences, to install technology on our police force’s system in order to block espionage,” he said outside the House of Commons on Wednesday. “I mean, it’s almost something that you’d expect to be out of a spy novel, but characters in spy novels would never be that incompetent,” he added. Public safety minister Marco Mendicino said he had instructed his staff to look closely at the contract and the process by which it was awarded. “We’re eyes wide open about the threats that are posed by hostile state and non-state actors,” Mendicino said after a Liberal caucus meeting on Wednesday. “One of the reasons why we put in place a process that looks at the potential opportunities, or vectors, for foreign interference in the context of contracts is to secure Canadian national interest, to secure our national security.” With Agence France-Presse', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T01:04:10Z'}, {'id': '639025da8f0807b77be60288', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Peter Dutton once insisted Behrouz Boochani would not be allowed to come to Australia. Boochani just did – and he says he was always confident he would prove Dutton wrong. He casts it as a victory of culture over politics, of resistance overcoming power. “When you resist, you create something,” Boochani says.\nThe Kurdish writer and refugee is in Australia to promote his latest book Freedom, Only Freedom, a collection of work he wrote while in detention, alongside essays from experts on migration, refugee rights, politics and literature. Boochani was locked up in offshore detention for six years, during which he wrote and published the award-winning No Friend But the Mountains. He eventually settled in New Zealand. Boochani says while he feels his writing and advocacy has impacted Australian politics, he does not feel like an Australian writer. “I am a Kurdish Iranian writer. But I think this work is a part of Australia,” he says. “I don’t live in Australia, but I am connected to this country through my work. And I cannot forget about those years. And we have had an impact on Australia, we challenged Australia, we cannot get away from that. It will be there forever.” Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup Boochani fled ethnic persecution in Iran in 2013, attempting to arrive in Australia via boat from Indonesia, before being detained in the Manus Island detention centre. There Boochani witnessed the “brutal side” of Australia and its politics, and penned his first book via compiled WhatsApp messages. “We have faced the dark side of liberal democracy, and that’s why our voice is important, because we understand, we see politics in Australia in a unique way, our perspective needs to be shared here.\n“We were exiled by politicians, who have politicised human rights, and they have been using refugees as political tools. And so this work, alongside other work, is part of building resistance knowledge,” he says. Boochani reflects on comments by Dutton, who in 2019 said Boochani “wouldn’t be permitted to come to Australia”. Dutton’s words were in response to New Zealand’s decision to give the writer a visa to attend an event, eventually granting him refugee status. “I was confident I would eventually come to Australia. I was confident that resistance, that challenging power structures would end in success. And politicians, they don’t remain, but culture remains. Literature remains. Arts remains. And that resistance remains. And when you resist, you create something. “Some of those politicians who barred me from coming to Australia, they’re gone. But I am here,” he adds.\nBoochani says his freedom, and his current visit to Australia, are testament to the “historical” power of writing, but that he will always be affected by his time in offshore detention. “I’ve learned how to live through this story, and this experience, that has been a big part of my life. It’s not easy to just get away from that. I was imprisoned for six years. I am carrying something around forever. “And, of course, I have some anger, a political anger. It can be a positive thing to work to continue to challenge the system.”\nHe says he is disappointed to see offshore processing still in use by the Australian government, with the Refugee Council of Australia reporting that as of September this year there were 111 refugees on Nauru. When data ceased being published at the end of last year there were 105 in Papua New Guinea, in Port Moresby and Goroka. “Australia is delusional in many ways,” Boochani says. “I think Australia should be honest, and face the reality that a colonial mentality still exists, and it should be fully, deeply recognised. That’s when we will see a fundamental change. “I think nothing has really fundamentally changed in Australia. Two hundred people remain in Port Moresby and Nauru, and the government has done nothing to help them, to settle them.” Boochani’s new book was written in collaboration with Moones Mansoubi and Omid Tofighian, who describes the work as “horrific surrealism”. “Horrific surrealism is an interpretive schema that we used to try to understand everything to do with the situation, the political situation, the violence on the border, the experience in the camps and Behrouz’s own individual journey,” Tofighian says. They wanted to show that refugees can be knowledge producers, Tofighian explains. “Refugees are having a unique perspective on the world that can teach us things, they can show us things about state violence that many of us never knew existed.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T01:21:08Z'}, {'id': '63911d948f08d2809ffd09ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has vowed to continue attacking Ukrainian energy systems despite global criticism of strikes that have left millions without electricity and water at the start of winter. The Russian leader presented the strikes as a response to a blast on Moscow’s bridge to annexed Crimea and other attacks, accusing Kyiv of blowing up power lines from the Kursk nuclear power plant and not supplying water to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. Russia is still set on seizing parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that Putin claimed as his own, the Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. He added that the Crimean peninsula in southern Ukraine, which Russia annexed in 2014, was vulnerable to attacks by Ukrainian forces, after officials there said they had shot down a drone near a key naval base. Russia has claimed that its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, also said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks. About 10,000 Ukrainian service personnel and roughly the same number of Ukrainian civilians are believed to be being held in Russian detention facilities, according to a Ukrainian official. Oleksandr Kononenko, who oversees human rights in the security and defence sector on behalf of Ukraine’s parliament, said the civilians were being detained illegally as prisoners of war because of their alleged association with the Ukrainian army or state. Explosions have been reported at Berdiansk airbase in the Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Russian forces have fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid, which is still working despite taking major damage, a senior official said. Volodymyr Kudrytsky, the chief executive of the grid operator Ukrenergo, also told a meeting arranged by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that his officials were scouring the world for the complex equipment needed for repairs. Ukraine has introduced new emergency power cuts as it tried to repair energy infrastructure damaged in Russian airstrikes, which the national grid operator said had caused significant supply shortages. The grid operator Ukrenergo said the situation was complicated by the weather, with western regions facing frost, rain, snow and strong winds that were causing wires to ice over, but the most difficult situation was in eastern areas, where fighting has been fiercest. Russian troops are reportedly taking part in tactical exercises in Belarus, according to the Russian defence ministry. Video clips posted by the ministry showed Russian soldiers in snow gear training near tanks in a winter landscape, firing weapons including artillery. Russia freed the jailed US basketball star Brittney Griner on Thursday in a high-level prisoner exchange for the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout, who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. Joe Biden, who had made Griner’s release a top priority after she spent almost 10 months in jail on drugs charges, said in an address from the White House that he had spoken with Griner and found her “in good spirits”. Biden expressed regret the deal did not include Paul Whelan, an American jailed since December 2018 on espionage charges that his family and the US government say are baseless. An anonymous US official told CNN that leaving Whelan out of the deal had been “a difficult decision” but “it was a choice to get Brittney or nothing”. The EU plans to tighten up sanctions on Russia’s military and industrial complex, pro-Kremlin media and Russian nationalist groups fighting in Ukraine, according to leaked papers. A total of eight individuals are facing personal sanctions, including Russian officials said to be involved in the illegal transfer and adoption of Ukrainian children in Russia, as well as the leaders of rightwing nationalist groups. Russian shelling killed 10 people and wounded many others in the town of Kurakhove in eastern Ukraine, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said. Kyiv’s mayor Vitali Klitschko warned of an “apocalypse” scenario for the city this winter if Russian airstrikes on infrastructure continue. Russia has fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid, Interfax Ukraine news agency said. President Vladimir Putin has said that Russia’s war in Ukraine could turn into a “long-term process”. Speaking to members of his personal human rights council on Wednesday, Putin sought to defend an invasion in which Russian troops have been forced to retreat and even airbases deep inside Russia have come under attack. Putin also claimed that Russia would not use nuclear weapons first in any conflict and denied that Russian troops were deserting en-mass from the field of battle. He claimed that the Russian military would not need to mobilise more troops, a process that has caused considerable upheaval in Russia. The risk of nuclear weapons being used in the Ukraine conflict has lessened thanks to international pressure on Russia, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz said in an interview published Thursday. “One thing has changed for the time being: Russia has stopped threatening to use nuclear weapons. In response to the international community marking a red line,” Scholz said in the interview with Germany’s Funke media group. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said Russia is attempting to “freeze” the fighting in Ukraine over the winter to prepare its forces for a renewed assault early next year. Stoltenberg urged Nato allies to continue sending weapons to Kyiv over the winter, adding that the conditions for a peaceful settlement to the war are “not there now”. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said 31 “suspicious packages” had been sent to Ukrainian missions in 15 countries. In the past week, Ukraine says its embassies and consultants across Europe have received “bloody” packages, some containing animal eyes, in what Kyiv has described as a “campaign of terror and intimidation”. A road accident in the temporarily occupied eastern Ukrainian region of Donetsk has left 16 people dead and several injured, according to a Russian-backed official and state media. The accident involved a minibus and a truck, whose passengers included soldiers, and took place between Torez and Shakhtarsk, emergency services told the Russian state-owned news agency Tass. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, has called on the country’s western allies to boycott Russian culture. Writing in the Guardian, Tkachenko argues that a halt to performances of the music of Tchaikovsky and other Russian composers until the end of the war would be “pausing the performance of his works until Russia ceases its bloody invasion”. The US has made clear to Ukraine its “concerns” about any escalation of the war with Russia, the White House’s national security spokesperson, John Kirby, said. Kirby said the principle behind the war in Ukraine was one of sovereignty, and “unlike the Russians, we respect Ukrainian sovereignty”. Kirby’s comments came after Kyiv appeared to launch a pre-emptive strike on bombers on two Russian airbases far from the frontlines earlier this week. The Kremlin has said a US military aid spending bill providing $800m to Ukraine approved by lawmakers on Tuesday was “provocation towards our country”. The Fiscal 2023 National Defense Authorization Act, or NDAA, authorises the additional spending for the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative, an increase of $500m over President Joe Biden’s request earlier this year. Britain has ordered “several thousand” NLAW anti-tank weapons to replace the 7,000 donated to Ukraine in the past year. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, said the NLAWs played “a decisive role” in pushing back the Russian invasion, but Labour has complained that the deal took nearly 10 months to sign and the replacements will take three years to make. BP should donate its “wartime profits” in Russia to the reconstruction of Ukraine or ministers should impose a special windfall tax on the oil company to force it to do so, British MPs have told parliament. The British oil supermajor has a 19.75% stake in Rosneft, one of the Kremlin’s most important oil assets and signalled its intent to exit Russia nine months ago, after Russia invaded Ukraine. At least 441 civilians were killed by Russian forces during the first weeks of the war in Ukraine, according to a report by the UN’s human rights office. Many of the bodies documented in the report bore signs that the victims may have been intentionally killed, the report by the Office of the high commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) said. An Orthodox priest accused of leaking information on Ukrainian defence positions to Russia has been sentenced to 12 years in prison, according to the Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office. The priest from Lysychansk, in the Luhansk region of eastern Ukraine, had been informing the Russians about the positions of Ukrainian troops since April, it said in a statement on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T17:12:47Z'}]}