{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A moment of pride’: Hindus in India hail Rishi Sunak’s victory', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-24T14:13:55Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/24/moment-of-pride-hindus-celebrating-diwali-hail-rishi-sunak-victory', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'India', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/india'}, {'tagTitle': 'Rishi Sunak', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rishi-sunak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Conservatives', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'South and central Asia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-and-central-asia'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hinduism', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hinduism'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Amrit Dhillon', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amrit-dhillon'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '635649fd8f08ff8bc54cf960', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping’s purging of political rivals and elevation of loyalists to the top ranks of the Chinese Communist party has raised fears that his now unfettered and unquestionable power could increase the risk of an attack on Taiwan. Beijing has pledged to annex Taiwan under a disputed claim that it is a Chinese province, and in recent years has increased its military activity and other forms of harassment and coercion. No timeline has been set, but senior defence figures have said China could be capable of invasion as early as 2027. Others point to Xi’s pledge of “national rejuvenation” by 2047 – the centenary of the People’s Republic of China – as a potential goal. But with the events of last week’s CCP congress, which consolidated power around Xi at levels not seen for decades, some are now questioning whether there is anyone left in the party who could stop him from making a rash move. The 20th party congress – the most important meeting of China’s political cycle – ended with Xi’s reappointment for a precedent-breaking third term, and a reshuffle of officials. The central committee, the politburo, the seven-member standing committee (PSC) and the Xi-led central military commission (CMC), which is in charge of the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), are now dominated by loyalists and cleared of potential objectors and people from rival factions. Official reports and constitutional amendments also enshrined its hardening official stance towards Taiwan that had escalated as recently as August with the release of a white paper. Analysts and Taiwanese decision-makers are studying the changes to assess whether Xi’s timeline for Taiwan is any shorter, or the same. After a week of watching the congress – an exercise sometimes compared to reading tea leaves – most agreed it definitely had not slowed. Prof Steve Tsang, the director of the Soas China Institute, said the changes made last week unquestionably increased the risk of China using force against Taiwan. There was already a low appetite for raising objections among the previous CCP leadership ranks, said Tsang, but “by replacing non-loyalists by proteges and loyalists in the party [including the PLA], Xi has made sure that no one will ever contradict him”. “The risk of one man making a bad judgment and starting a war is always greater than a group of them doing so,” he added. Among the new CMC appointments is Gen He Weidong, a rising star who has overseen the the PLA’s eastern command since 2019. He was reportedly an architect of the massive military drills staged after the speaker of the US House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, visited Taiwan in August. He, who was not even in the 200-member central committee at the last congress, is now the second-ranked official of the CMC. The South China Morning Post also reported that other appointments, including Gen Zhang Youxia, and Adm Miao Hua, have similarly Taiwan-focused backgrounds. Taiwan’s defence minister, Chiu Kuo-cheng, said the CMC appointments suggested the CCP was “boosting its preparedness” for an invasion, Taiwanese media reported. Victor Shih, an associate professor of political science at the University of California, said the new makeup of the PSC and CMC ensured Xi’s orders would be implemented, “however extreme”. “This may include a decision to invade Taiwan. Of course, preparing for something doesn’t mean it will happen,” Shih said. Xi’s continued commitment to “reunification” was first confirmed last week in his 104-minute opening speech, which made early and numerous references to Taiwan. In the longer “work report”, of which the speech was an excerpt, a key phrase defined reunification as a “requirement” for this promised “rejuvenation of the Chinese nation”. Analysts had said the absence of such phrasing could have signalled a de-escalation.\nThe amendments to the CCP’s guiding constitution also cemented Beijing’s more aggressive stance on Taiwan. Where it previously listed Taiwan alongside Hong Kong and Macau as a place with which to “build solidarity”, it now sweared to “resolutely oppose and constrain Taiwan independence”. The propaganda apparatus played along. According to the Xinhua news agency, a Chinese state mouthpiece, when Xi declared the wheels of history were rolling towards reunification, the people of Taiwan “deeply felt the harmony and warmth” of his words. Across the Taiwan Strait, the large and growing majority of Taiwan’s 23.5 million population who oppose annexation beg to differ, but in Xi’s China what the Taiwanese public wants is no real consideration. Analysis by the International Crisis Group (ICG) noted that the Chinese work report made the particular point in blaming “foreign interference and Taiwan separatists” for the tensions, suggesting the CCP may be seeking to drive a wedge between the Taiwan’s pro-independence majority and its pro-unification minority while resisting international pushback. “By emphasising that it maintains the option to use military force specifically to deter foreign and independence-seeking forces, Beijing may be trying to limit backlash among Taiwanese who have reacted negatively to its shows of military force in Taiwan’s air defence identification zone and in the middle of the Taiwan Strait,” the thinktank said. Drew Thompson, a visiting senior research fellow at the National University of Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew school of public policy and a former US state department official, said the political dynamic in Beijing had changed as Xi was “without rivals, a designated successor or moderating voices” to act as a check on his impulses. But knowing the Chinese president’s innermost thoughts and plans is a near impossible task. “We can ask endless questions why Xi and the party make particular decisions, but we can’t definitively answer any of them,” Thompson said, noting that even Beijing insiders were left guessing as to the final makeup of the PSC until Sunday. Bonnie Glaser, a China expert at the US-based German Marshall Fund thinktank, warned against speculation, saying she saw no evidence of “increased urgency” in the congress work report. “I think the risks are growing, but I believe that Xi is mindful of the potentially high costs of an attempted military takeover of Taiwan and he likely knows the PLA is not ready,” she said. Amanda Hsiao, an ICG analyst and co-author of the thinktank’s report, said things may become clearer when the current head of China’s Taiwan affairs office – who was removed from the central committee – is replaced. But she said it was clear from the work report and the August white paper that there was “a lot of continuity in the basic principles that have undergirded China’s approach to Taiwan”. “China will likely stepping up pressures on Taiwan in the coming years and will more or less follow the playbook they’ve been employing in the last couple of years,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T16:03:15Z'}, {'id': '42640a85-9559-4aec-a2dd-13bb1cee5c81', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As Harvey Weinstein faces a new trial on multiple rape and sexual assault charges in Los Angeles, a prosecutor alleged a series of graphic rapes in hotel rooms across the city, and a group of women who were left terrified by Weinstein’s power within Hollywood. Opening statements began on Monday, with prosecutors in Los Angeles saying that eight women would testify about Weinstein’s alleged crimes, including Jennifer Siebel Newsom, a documentary film-maker and actor who is now married to the governor of California, Gavin Newsom. Siebel Newsom alleges that Weinstein raped her during what she thought would be a business meeting in 2005, when she was a young actor trying to build her career. In his opening statement, Weinstein’s defense attorney, Mark Werksman, said that accusers in the case had either “made up” the assaults or had engaged in transactional sex with the once-powerful film producer. The current first lady of California was presenting herself as a #MeToo victim to avoid being “just another bimbo who slept with Harvey Weinstein to get ahead in Hollywood”, Werksman said. “You’re not gonna see a single eyewitness to any claim of sexual assault,” Werksman told the jury. “At its heart, each and everyone of these allegations is going to boil down to the accusers saying ‘believe me’.” Today, Weinstein, 70, is serving a 23-year sentence after being convicted of sex crimes in New York in February 2020. Since 2017, nearly 100 women have publicly accused Weinstein of sexual violence and inappropriate sexual behavior during encounters going back to the 1970s, revelations that fueled an international reckoning with the lack of criminal or social consequences for powerful men who sexually abuse women. Weinstein has pleaded not guilty to the new charges and has said all of his sexual encounters with women were consensual. Opening statements from both the prosecution and the defense made clear that the trial would grapple with the continued interactions the alleged victims had with Weinstein in the years after they were assaulted. Prosecutor Paul Thompson said the jury would hear testimony from a doctor who works with sexual assault victims about misconceptions about how people behave after being raped, including how many people are raped by someone they know and continue to communicate with their attacker after the assault. Werksman, the defense attorney, said the jury would hear about the emails the alleged victims sent Weinstein for years after their encounters, including an email Siebel Newsom allegedly sent in 2007 asking Weinstein for advice about a “bad press situation”.\nThe identities of Weinstein’s current accusers are being kept secret in court documents, which have referred to them as Jane Does one through five. Siebel Newsom’s lawyer has spoken publicly about her planned testimony as “Jane Doe 4”, and Thompson mentioned her husband’s name in court. While the district attorney’s office has previously said that nine women would testify in the case, there was no mention of Jane Doe 5 throughout the prosecutor’s opening arguments, which mentioned testimony from only eight women. The reasons for this change were not immediately clear. Weinstein was indicted on 11 counts overall, but four of those counts – including two counts of rape and two of sexual assault – involved the woman who was not included in the prosecution’s opening statement. Gloria Allred, an attorney for Jane Doe 5, declined to comment on the omission, the Los Angeles Times reported. Thompson described multiple women weeping as Weinstein assaulted them, and one woman showing him pictures of her children mid-assault to try to get him to stop. That woman, the trial’s first witness, a European actor and model referred to in court documents as “Jane Doe 1”, alleged that Weinstein unexpectedly showed up at her hotel room during an Italian film festival in Los Angeles, and first asked her for a massage, and then grabbed her and forced her to perform oral sex. She testified that she repeatedly asked Weinstein to leave, saying that she could not have sex with him because she had three children, and that she started crying and choking during the encounter. Asked by Thompson how Weinstein reacted to her crying, she said, “He didn’t care.” The judge overseeing the trial, LA superior court Judge Lisa Lench, adjourned the court on Monday afternoon as the first witness sobbed while describing the assault. Prosecutors said the other witnesses will testify to a similar pattern of unexpected assaults in hotel rooms, and particularly in hotel room bathrooms. In 2005, Siebel Newsom was a “powerless actor trying to make her way in Hollywood” when Weinstein invited her to a business meeting and then raped her, Thompson said. Siebel Newsom was invited to “discuss her career” at a hotel, and was surprised when the meeting was moved to a private suite and Weinstein’s business associates quickly left, Thompson said. Weinstein then allegedly summoned her to a bathroom, asked her to touch him, and then forced her on to a bed. During the assault, Siebel Newsom was crying and shaking, and “couldn’t get any words out because of her fear”, Thompson said. A third woman, a celebrity masseuse, went into a bathroom to wash her hands after giving Weinstein a massage, only to have Weinstein follow her into the bathroom, grope her and masturbate on to the floor, the prosecutor alleged. Weinstein told the masseuse it “was completely normal, he’d done it with so many people”, Thompson said. The masseuse is also expected to testify that on a later occasion, when her new boss wanted an introduction to Weinstein, he told her “it’s going to cost you”, and demanded that she watch him masturbate, Thompson said.\nWerksman, the defense attorney, said in his opening statement the trial simply highlighted that “in Hollywood, sex was a commodity”, and said that “transactional sex” described in the trial “may have been unpleasant, and embarrassing … but it was consensual”. Weinstein was brought into court in a wheelchair on Monday by deputies,. He did not show much reaction to the graphic descriptions of his alleged rapes and assaults. Among other potential witnesses who may testify in the trial is the actor Mel Gibson, who prosecutors say was a friend of one of the accusers. Weinstein could face up to 140 years in prison if convicted on all charges in Los Angeles. In New York, Weinstein is appealing his 2020 conviction for rape and sexual assault, and is more than two years into his 23-year prison sentence. The state’s highest court has agreed to hear his appeal in that case. The Associated Press contributed reporting', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-25T13:45:50Z'}, {'id': 'c728a69c-f4fd-4e1e-95c5-d7730b4a03ce', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Dirty bombs” have long been feared as a potential weapon of terrorists, because their main objective is to sow panic, confusion and anxiety by hurling radioactive dust and smoke into the atmosphere. The Kremlin alleges that Ukraine is preparing to detonate a dirty bomb in order to blame it on Russia and force an escalation to the war that has entered its ninth month. Western countries have dismissed that claim as “transparently false”. Although no dirty bomb attack has ever been recorded, two failed attempts to detonate such a device were reported in the southern Russian province of Chechnya more than two decades ago. How does a dirty bomb work? Technically known as radiological dispersion devices, dirty bombs are relatively primitive, imprecise weapons. They are much easier and cheaper to build than a nuclear device and also far less dangerous. Dirty bombs use conventional explosives, such as dynamite, placed alongside radioactive material, which is then flung outward by the force of the blast. The amount of radioactive material dispersed, while dangerous, is not necessarily lethal. The material used in the bomb could have been obtained from radioactive sources used in medicine and industry or from research facilities. “A dirty bomb is really easy to make,” says Scott Roecker, vice-president for the nuclear materials security program at the Nuclear Threat Initiative, a non-profit based in Washington. “It’s a crude device.” What damage can a dirty bomb do? The number of casualties and the extent of damage from a dirty bomb depends on many variables. A key factor is the amount and type of conventional explosives that are used, which determine the magnitude of the blast. The quantity and type of radioactive materials released are other factors, as are weather conditions – especially the wind – at the time of the blast. A potentially wide area could be contaminated. Most dirty bombs would not discharge enough radiation to cause death or even severe illness. Low levels of radiation exposure usually do not cause any symptoms. People may not know whether they have been exposed because radiation cannot be seen, smelled or tasted. How dangerous is a dirty bomb? Its main impact is psychological, which is why such devices are often referred to as “weapons of mass disruption”. Dirty bombs are not for battlefield use, being deployed more obviously in urban areas, Roecker said. “They’re more of a psychological weapon. When you’re trying to scare people, intimidate people, you’d use a weapon like this,” he said. The radioactive dust and smoke can spread far and are dangerous if inhaled near the blast. The radioactive cloud would probably spread over several blocks, according to Roecker. But as radioactive material spreads through the atmosphere, it becomes less concentrated and therefore less harmful. Key factors in radiation exposure are what type of radiation it is, how long someone is exposed to it, and whether the radiation was absorbed through the skin, inhaled or consumed orally. Specialised equipment is required to detect radiation. Contaminated homes, businesses and public services could be placed off-limits for months and require an expensive clean-up operation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-25T01:28:22Z'}, {'id': '63569fed8f08855c22ca6228', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Girls and young women in the north of England feel less safe and less happy than their counterparts in London and the south, according to a survey by the Girlguiding charity, which is concerned about “stark” regional differences in attitudes. More than one in five (22%) girls and young women in the north aged 11-16 who took part in the survey published on Tuesday blamed fear of sexual harassment for holding them back at school. The figure was significantly lower at 16% in London and the south. Similarly, more than a quarter in the north (26%) said gender stereotyping was holding them back at school, compared with 18% in London and the south. The problem was particularly acute among LGBTQ+ girls and young women, with almost two in five (37%) complaining about gender stereotyping at school.\nOverall, almost one in five (19%) girls and young women who took part in the survey said they don’t feel safe at school, but those in the north were less likely to feel safe (22%), compared with 19% in the Midlands and 16% in London and the south. Girls and young women of colour are, however, less likely to feel safe at school than their white counterparts (65% against 70%). Chief executive Angela Salt said: “It is shocking how many girls and young women, some as young as 11 years old, don’t feel safe at school, on social media or out in public. Our research shows just how common discrimination, stereotyping and sexism is in our society and how unsurprisingly this creates barriers to happiness, confidence and success. “Coupled with the disparities in girls’ experiences across the country, it is vital we act now to address these issues to ensure every girl and young woman is provided with the opportunities to fulfil their potential, no matter where they live.” More than 3,000 girls and young women across the UK aged between seven and 21 were surveyed over March and April for the 2022 annual Girlguiding attitudes survey. On Tuesday, the Home Office is due to uncover the second phase of its Enough campaign, which was set up to help tackle violence against girls and young women. It will use television adverts, billboards, social media and radio advertising to highlight different forms of violence against women and girls and how to challenge perpetrators of abuse. The safeguarding minister, Mims Davies, said: “There is no place in our society for cowardly acts of violence against women and girls.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T18:38:08Z'}, {'id': '8cda5495-9194-493b-8e2c-3c04a2ed8d70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iranian security forces fired teargas outside a girls’ school in Tehran when clashes broke out after staff attempted to inspect students’ mobile phones amid ongoing anti-government protests. Iran’s Ministry of Education said several students were treated by emergency services for a drop in blood pressure, but denied that security forces had entered the school. But videos circulating on social media showed heavily armed security forces outside the school. One clip showed them on motorbikes and firing at least one teargas canister. The authenticity of the footage could not be independently verified.\nUnrest ignited by the death of Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old Kurdish-Iranian woman who was detained by the Islamic Republic’s morality police for “improper attire” and died in police custody, has swept Iran for five weeks. Rights groups say nearly 250 people have been killed in the crackdown. Women and girls have played a prominent part in the protests, removing and burning veils. The deaths of several teenage girls reportedly killed during protests have fuelled more anger. Demonstrations continued on Monday, with a rally at a university in the western city of Hamedan, and students shouting down a government spokesperson who visited a Tehran university, according to students’ and rights groups. The education ministry said there was a clash at the Tehran high school between staff, students and parents after the school principal insisted on checking the girls’ phones. The widely followed activist Twitter account Tasvir1500 said uniformed forces attacked the school and at least one girl was wounded, but the city police denied their account.\n“After news of a conflict near a high school … police were dispatched to the area and investigated the issue which turned out to be a fight between a number of thugs,” Tehran police said, adding that agitators were identified and arrested. Rights groups say thousands of people have been arrested in the crackdown, which started in Amini’s home town of Saqez in north-west Iran before spreading across the country. Protesters have called for an end to the religious clerical rule that has governed Iran since the 1979 Islamic revolution, and for the overthrow of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. On Monday a court in Tehran indicted 315 people arrested in recent “riots” for “gathering and conspiring with intent to damage national security, propaganda against the system and igniting public disorder,” state news agency Irna reported, citing a judiciary official. Four of the detainees have been charged as enemies of God, an offence which under Iran’s interpretation of sharia law incurs the death penalty. Videos on social media showed anti-government protests at several universities, with students chanting “Death to Khamenei”. Khamenei has warned that nobody should dare think they can uproot the Islamic Republic, and has accused adversaries of fomenting the unrest. State TV has reported the deaths of at least 26 security force members. At the Khajeh Nasir Toosi University of Technology in Tehran, video footage showed government spokesperson Ali Bahadori Jahromi being interrupted with chants of “Woman, life, freedom” as he addressed students, who also shouted: “We don’t want a corrupt system, we don’t want a murderous guest.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T20:58:21Z'}, {'id': '6356d7658f08ff8bc54d0087', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two Chinese intelligence officers tried to bribe a US law enforcement official as part of an effort to obtain inside information about a criminal case against the Chinese telecommunications company Huawei, federal prosecutors alleged in an indictment unsealed on Monday.\nThe announcement of charges against the two alleged agents came as the attorney general, Merrick Garland, detailed two other cases in which Chinese intelligence operatives harassed dissidents inside the United States and pressured US academics to work for them. Garland said that the cases showed that China “sought to interfere with the rights and freedoms of individuals in the United States and to undermine our judicial system that protects those rights. “The justice department will not tolerate attempts by any foreign power to undermine the rule of law upon which our democracy is based,” he said. Washington has long accused Beijing of meddling in US politics and attempting to steal intellectual property. But the move to unmask the espionage operation marked an escalation by the justice department after it accused Huawei in February 2020 of conducting racketeering and conspiracy to steal trade secrets. “This was an egregious attempt by PRC intelligence officers to shield a PRC-based company from accountability and to undermine the integrity of our judicial system,” Garland said at a news conference unveiling the indictment. The Chinese intelligence officers Guochun He and Zheng Wang attempted to orchestrate a scheme to steal the prosecution strategy memo, witness lists, and other confidential evidence from the US attorney’s office for the eastern district of New York, the indictment said. The charging papers against He and Wang referred only to an unnamed telecommunications company based in China, but the entity in question is understood to be Huawei, according to a source familiar with the matter. According to the indictment unsealed in Brooklyn, the Chinese agents paid about $61,000 worth of bitcoin in bribes to a US government official whom they believed had been recruited to work for the Chinese government but in fact worked as a double agent for the FBI. The FBI double agent provided some documents to the Chinese agents that appeared to present some of the information they sought – though the documents were actually prepared by the justice department and did not reveal actual meetings or trial strategies. Starting in September 2021, the indictment said, He and Wang asked the FBI double agent about what he learned from the US attorney’s office in New York, and which Huawei employees had been interviewed by federal prosecutors as a way to gain insight into the case.\nThe following month, the FBI double agent sent them a document made to look like an internal strategy memo that was labelled “Secret” and discussed a plan to charge and arrest two Huawei employees living in China, for which He is alleged to have paid $41,000 in bitcoin bribes. The initial bribe was followed with a second payment of $20,000 in bitcoin from He as a “reward” in September 2022, the indictment said. US law enforcement officials have long warned about national security threats posed by China, including through human and cyber espionage, as part of increasingly brazen attempts to steal corporate intellectual property, trade secrets and influence US policy. “The cases unsealed today take place against a backdrop of malign activity by the People’s Republic of China that includes espionage, harassment, obstruction of our justice system and unceasing efforts to steal US technology,” the deputy attorney general, Lisa Monaco, said. “China seeks to be a major power on the world stage and challenge the United States in multiple arenas. Today’s cases make clear that Chinese agents will not hesitate to break the law and to violate international norms in the process,” Monaco said. Arrest warrants were issued for the two men, but it is unlikely they will ever be taken into custody. The Chinese embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment, though China and Huawei have both previously denied such allegations. He and Wang, understood to be based in China, could not be reached. At the news conference on Monday, Garland also announced a second indictment newly unsealed in New Jersey that charged three Chinese intelligence officers with conspiring to act as illegal agents between 2008 and 2018 under the cover of an academic institution. That indictment alleges the three intelligence officials had attempted to illegally ship US technology to China, as well as to undercut protests in the US that would have probably been embarrassing to the Chinese government.\nSeparately two people were arrested and five others charged with harassing a US resident in order to force them to return to China. Part of the plot, prosecutors allege, involved having the person’s nephew travel to the US as part of a tour group to deliver threats that included, “Coming back and turning yourself in is the only way out.” Chinese agents have pursued hundreds of Chinese nationals living in the US in an effort to force their return, as part of a global campaign against the country’s diaspora, known as Operation Fox Hunt, the FBI has said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-25T13:21:10Z'}, {'id': '6356cd948f08ff8bc54d0028', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv and Moscow. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war live blog today. Here’s where we stand: Russia’s grip on the city of Kherson appeared increasingly fragile after a weekend in which all civilians were ordered to evacuate immediately in the face of the advancing Ukrainian counteroffensive. The US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War said the urgent call indicated that the occupiers “do not expect a rapid Russian or civilian return” to the city, and appeared to be trying to depopulate it to damage its “long-term social and economic viability”. All men remaining in Kherson have been invited to join a newly formed local militia. In a notice on Telegram, the occupation authorities said men had the “opportunity” to join territorial defence units if they chose to remain in Kherson of their own free will. Compelling civilians to serve in the armed forces of an occupying power is defined as a breach of the Geneva conventions. The head of Ukraine’s defence intelligence directorate said Russia was bringing new military units into Kherson as it prepares to defend the city in the face of the advancing Ukrainian counteroffensive. Kyrylo Budanov also said Russia would slow Ukrainian troops’ advance in the south by only about two weeks if it blows up the Kakhova hyrdoelectric dam near Kherson. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has told western counterparts that the war in Ukraine is heading for an “uncontrolled escalation” amid evidence that the Kremlin is weighing how to respond to yet another anticipated battlefield defeat around the key southern city of Kherson. The United Nations has said urgent steps are needed to relieve a backlog of more than 150 ships involved in a deal that allows Ukraine to export grain from ports in the Black Sea. Ukraine said Russian inspections that have been creating “significant” delays for the export of Ukrainian food products were “politically motivated” and a cause for concern. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow had asked the UN for data on the destination and end-consumers for Ukrainian grain exports, saying that “corrections” to the agreement would depend on this information. The United States has no indications that Russia has made any decision to use a nuclear weapon, biological weapon or chemical weapon, a US military official has said. The US believes Russia is “keeping lines of communication open” after Moscow requested a call between US defence secretary Lloyd Austin and Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu on Sunday, the official added. Ukraine and the US denounced suggestions from Russia that Ukraine was preparing to use a “dirty bomb” as dangerous lies. “If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a video address. The White House national security council also rejected Shoigu’s claims. “The world would see through any attempt to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation,” a statement said. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has asked the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, to send experts to Ukraine’s nuclear facilities to disprove Russian claims that Ukraine plans to use a “dirty bomb”. The EU’s foreign policy chief Josep Borrell welcomed Ukraine’s decision to request an expert mission from the UN’s nuclear watchdog to examine its facilities. Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg said he spoke with the US secretary of defence Lloyd Austin and his British counterpart Ben Wallace about Russia’s evidence-free claim that Ukraine plans to use a “dirty bomb”. The alliance rejects Moscow’s claims, he said, warning that Russia “must not use it as a pretext for escalation” in its war in Ukraine. Russia’s military chief of general staff Valery Gerasimov held calls with Britain’s chief of defence staff Tony Radakin and the chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff Mark Milley on Monday. The Russian defence ministry said Radakin and his British and American counterparts discussed the possibility, raised by Moscow without providing any evidence, that Ukraine might use a “dirty bomb”. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged Israel to join the fight against Russia and repeated an appeal for Israeli air defence systems. Israel has condemned Russia’s invasion and has limited its assistance to deliveries of humanitarian aid and defensive equipment. Most recently it offered to help Ukrainians develop air attack alerts for civilians. Zelenskiy said that was not enough and asked that Israeli leaders reconsider sending air defences as well. Ukraine’s special operations forces said that Iranian drone instructors have been spotted in Belarus. According to special operations forces, Iran’s Islamic revolutionary guard corps are training Russian forces in Belarus and coordinating the launches of Iranian-made drones. Ukraine faces power outages after Russian strikes target energy facilities. Russian airstrikes on energy infastructure across the country have left more than a million households in Ukraine without electricity, the deputy head of the Ukrainian presidency, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, said at the weekend. Rebuilding Ukraine will be a “task for a generation” that no country, donor or international institution can manage alone, Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz said. Scholz said it was important to repair destroyed energy plants and networks but also to make them more efficient, to ultimately allow an expansion of Ukrainian electricity exports to the EU and a step-by-step transition to climate neutrality. An overwhelming majority of Ukrainians believe the country should keep up its armed resistance to Russia’s invasion, according to a new poll. The survey, conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS) took place after two weeks of heavy Russian shelling of Ukrainian cities, including the capital Kyiv. It showed 86% said it was necessary to continue fighting even if missile and drone attacks on Ukrainian cities persist. A pro-Kremlin television presenter has been accused of inciting genocide after calling for Ukrainian children to be “drowned” and “burned” alive during an interview on the state-funded RT channel. Anton Krasovsky, the chief of Russian-language broadcasting for the channel formerly called Russia Today, was suspended from RT, and the head of Russia’s powerful investigative committee said it would review his remarks as part of a potential criminal investigation. US basketball star Brittney Griner “does not expect miracles” at her appeal hearing on Tuesday, her lawyers said in a statement. The two-time Olympic gold medallist is appealing against a nine-year Russian jail term for drug possession and smuggling. Her lawyers said she would take part in Tuesday’s hearing by video link from the detention centre where she has been held, and that they expected a verdict the same day.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T18:01:04Z'}, {'id': '6356c8ef8f08855c22ca6476', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US basketball star Brittney Griner “does not expect miracles” at her appeal hearing tomorrow, her lawyers said in a statement. The two-time Olympic gold medallist is appealing against a nine-year Russian jail term for drug possession and smuggling. Griner pleaded guilty at her trial but said she had made an “honest mistake” and had not meant to break the law.\nGriner’s lawyers said she would take part in Tuesday’s hearing by video link from the detention centre where she has been held, and that they expected a verdict the same day, Reuters reports. They said: She is very nervous waiting for the appeal hearing. Brittney does not expect any miracles to happen but hopes that the appeal court will hear the arguments of the defence and reduce the term.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T17:22:07Z'}, {'id': '6356c7958f08855c22ca6465', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has spoken with the US secretary of defence Lloyd Austin and his British counterpart Ben Wallace about Russia’s evidence-free claim that Ukraine plans to use a “dirty bomb”. The alliance rejects Moscow’s claims, he said, warning that Russia “must not use it as a pretext for escalation” in its war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T17:15:27Z'}, {'id': '6356c21a8f0885fc0bbd3ffc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU’s foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has welcomed Ukraine’s decision to request an expert mission from the UN’s nuclear watchdog to examine its facilities over Russian claims that it is developing a “dirty bomb”. Borell said he had spoken with Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba on the Russian claims, which he described as false.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T16:50:20Z'}, {'id': '6356bf498f08ff8bc54cff89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged Israel to join the fight against Russia and repeated an appeal for Israeli air defence systems. Zelenskiy said in a video speech to a conference for the Israeli newspaper Haaretz: Isn’t it time for your state to choose who you are with as well? Is it with the democratic world, which is fighting side by side against the existential threat to its existence? Or with those who turn a blind eye to Russian terror, even when the cost of continued terror is the complete destruction of global security. Israel has refused to sell air defence weapons to Kyiv, wary of straining relations with Moscow despite reports that Iran is providing support for Russian pilots flying Iranian-made drones to bomb civilian targets in Ukraine. Moscow has denied its use of the Iranian drones against Ukrainian cities, but Tehran officials have confirmed it and said they will also supply ballistic missiles to help replenished Russia’s dwindling armoury. Israel has condemned Russia’s invasion and has limited its assistance to deliveries of humanitarian aid and defensive equipment. Most recently it offered to help Ukrainians develop air attack alerts for civilians. Speaking today, Preisident Zelenskiy said that was not enough and asked that Israeli leaders reconsider sending air defences as well.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T16:38:23Z'}, {'id': '6356b7478f0885fc0bbd3f6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States has no indications that Russia has made any decision to use a nuclear weapon, biological weapon or chemical weapon, a US military official has said. From Foreign Policy’s Jack Detsch:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T16:05:12Z'}, {'id': '6356b38f8f08855c22ca6358', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An overwhelming majority of Ukrainians believe the country should keep up its armed resistance to Russia’s invasion, according to a new poll. The survey, conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS) took place after two weeks of heavy Russian shelling of Ukrainian cities, including the capital Kyiv. It showed 86% said it was necessary to continue fighting even if missile and drone attacks on Ukrainian cities persist. The proportion of people backing continued armed resistance remained high, at 69%, even in the Kharkiv and Donetsk regions which have seen more fighting and are home to larger numbers of Russian speakers. The results of the survey showed Russia’s shelling of Ukrainian cities had achieved the opposite of its intended aim “to sow panic, despair and force Ukrainians to surrender”, the deputy director of KIIS Anton Hrushetskyi said. He added: Yes, the terror continues, people die or are injured, Ukrainian families are forced to spend their evenings in the dark. However, the national pain from losses and destruction does not frighten people. The Ukrainian people maintain strong unity and stability and are ready to continue the struggle to victory.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T15:48:20Z'}, {'id': '6356aded8f08855c22ca630c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s military chief of general staff Valery Gerasimov has spoken with Britain’s chief of defence staff Tony Radakin and the chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff Mark Milley today. The Russian defence ministry said Radakin and his British counterpart discussed the possibility, raised by Moscow without providing any evidence, that Ukraine might use a “dirty bomb”. Radakin rejected Russia’s allegations that Ukraine is planning actions to escalate the conflict during the call, the British defence ministry said in a statement. An MoD spokesperson added: The military leaders both agreed on the importance of maintaining open channels of communication between the UK and Russia to manage the risk of miscalculation and to facilitate de-escalation. The conversation followed the defence secretary’s call with his Russian counterpart yesterday and a call between the foreign ministers of France, the UK, and the USA last night. Shortly after, Radakin had a similar conversation with Milley.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T15:29:47Z'}, {'id': '6356a7aa8f08855c22ca6283', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rebuilding Ukraine will be a “task for a generation” that no country, donor or international institution can manage alone, Germany’s chancellor Olaf Scholz said. Speaking at a German-Ukrainian business forum, Scholz pointed to the EU’s decision in June to make Ukraine a candidate to join the bloc. He said: This decision also sends a signal to private investors: anyone who invests in rebuilding Ukraine today is investing in a future EU member country that will be part of our legal community and our single market. Scholz said it was important to repair destroyed energy plants and networks but also to make them more efficient, to ultimately allow an expansion of Ukrainian electricity exports to the EU and a step-by-step transition to climate neutrality. He stressed the need for more transparency and “an even more determined fight against corruption” as Ukraine strives ultimately to join the bloc. Ukraine’s prime minister Denys Shmyhal told the forum that rebuilding will be a forward-looking process.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T14:58:28Z'}, {'id': '6356a3fb8f0885fc0bbd3e20', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A pro-Kremlin television presenter has been accused of inciting genocide after calling for Ukrainian children to be “drowned” and “burned” alive during an interview on the state-funded RT channel. Anton Krasovsky, the chief of Russian-language broadcasting for the channel formerly called Russia Today, said Ukrainian children who said they were being occupied by Russia should be “thrown in a river with a strong undercurrent”. “They should have been drowned in the Tysyna [river],” said Krasovsky during an interview with the fantasy writer Sergei Lukyanenko. Just drown these children. Drown them.\nRussian state media has previously hosted commentators who have denied the existence of Ukrainian culture or called for the country’s total annexation by Russia. But even in the era of Russian wartime propaganda, where it appears that anything goes, Krasovsky’s remarks have provoked a backlash. On Monday, he was suspended from RT, and the head of Russia’s powerful investigative committee said it would review his remarks as part of a potential criminal investigation. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T14:42:39Z'}, {'id': '6356a20a8f08855c22ca6234', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence ministry said its troops have liberated more than 90 settlements in the Kherson region from the Russians. It said in a post on Telegram: In the Kherson region, the Southern Defense Forces liberated more than 90 settlements that are home to more than 12,000 people live.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T14:33:20Z'}, {'id': '6356a12a8f0885fc0bbd3e09', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak has accused Russia of only communicating with the world in the language of “blackmail”. Russian claims that Ukraine is preparing to use a “dirty bomb” are another example of this use of blackmail, Podolyak said on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T14:29:27Z'}, {'id': '63569d528f08855c22ca621b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, held talks today with Pope Francis, with the war in Ukraine expected to have been their main topic of discussion.\nThe Vatican said the conversation lasted 55 minutes but, as is customary, did not specify what they discussed. It said Ukraine, in particular its humanitarian situation, topped the agenda in later talks Macron had with the Vatican’s two top diplomats.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T14:54:12Z'}, {'id': '63568c1a8f08ff8bc54cfc5d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 4pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where we stand: Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has told western counterparts that the war in Ukraine is heading for an “uncontrolled escalation” amid evidence that the Kremlin is weighing how to respond to yet another anticipated battlefield defeat around the key southern city of Kherson. The United Nations has said urgent steps are needed to relieve a backlog of more than 150 ships involved in a deal that allows Ukraine to export grain from ports in the Black Sea. Ukraine said Russian inspections that have been creating “significant” delays for the export of Ukrainian food products were “politically motivated” and a cause for concern. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow had asked the UN for data on the destination and end-consumers for Ukrainian grain exports, saying that “corrections” to the agreement would depend on this information. Russia’s grip on the city of Kherson appeared increasingly fragile after a weekend in which all civilians were ordered to evacuate immediately in the face of the advancing Ukrainian counteroffensive. The US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War said the urgent call indicated that the occupiers “do not expect a rapid Russian or civilian return” to the city, and appeared to be trying to depopulate it to damage its “long-term social and economic viability”. All men remaining in Kherson have been invited to join a newly formed local militia. In a notice on Telegram, the occupation authorities said men had the “opportunity” to join territorial defence units if they chose to remain in Kherson of their own free will. Compelling civilians to serve in the armed forces of an occupying power is defined as a breach of the Geneva conventions. The head of Ukraine’s defence intelligence directorate said Russia was bringing new military units into Kherson as it prepares to defend the city in the face of the advancing Ukrainian counteroffensive. Kyrylo Budanov also said Russia would slow Ukrainian troops’ advance in the south by only about two weeks if it blows up the Kakhova hyrdoelectric dam near Kherson. A former chief of the British army has said Russia faces an “inevitable defeat” in Kherson ahead of an expected battle. Gen Lord Dannatt claimed Vladimir Putin’s troops are attempting to save face to make their defeat appear “less chaotic”. Dannatt also suggested Russia was targeting Ukraine’s energy infrastructure as they were “still on the back foot” on the battlefield. Concern is also growing that Russia may blow up a large hydroelectric dam at Nova Kakhovka, upstream from Kherson, which holds back 18m cubic metres of water. On Friday, Ukrainian defence intelligence warned that the dam had been mined and that two trucks full of explosives had been placed on top of its 30m-high walls. The US has rejected as “transparently false” Russia’s evidence-free claim that Ukraine is preparing to use a “dirty bomb” on its own territory as part of an escalation of Vladimir Putin’s war. Secretary of state Antony Blinken told his Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba, on Sunday “the world would see through any attempt by Russia to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation”. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy reacted swiftly to Moscow’s claims, calling for a united international response. “If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Zelenskiy said in a video address on social media. His foreign minister Kuleba denounced Moscow’s claims as “absurd” and “dangerous”. Russia continues to use Iranian uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs), otherwise known as drones, against targets throughout Ukraine, though Ukrainian efforts to defeat the Shahed-136 UAVs are increasingly successful, the UK Ministry of Defence has determined. Official sources, including Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy, claim that up to 85% of attacks are being intercepted, according to the latest British intelligence report.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T13:15:53Z'}, {'id': '63568a8f8f08ff8bc54cfc40', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Russia’s nuclear, chemical, and biological forces has said Moscow has “readied all forces and capabilities to fulfil tasks in conditions of radioactive contamination”, Max Seddon from the Financial Times writes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T13:16:07Z'}, {'id': '6356843b8f08ff8bc54cfbf7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has told western counterparts that the war in Ukraine is heading for an “uncontrolled escalation” amid evidence that the Kremlin is weighing how to respond to yet another anticipated battlefield defeat around the key southern city of Kherson. With Russian troops setting up new defences for a fresh Ukrainian offensive in Luhansk in the country’s east as well, Moscow appears to be preparing the ground for yet further escalation, with discredited claims that Kyiv may be preparing to use a dirty bomb as a “false-flag operation” to blame Russia. Russian officials – including Vladimir Putin – have repeatedly hinted that the Kremlin may be prepared to use a nuclear weapon as part of its so-far failed brinkmanship to discourage Kyiv and its western allies, which have been supplying Ukraine with modern weapons, intelligence and training. Shoigu discussed the “rapidly deteriorating situation” in phone calls with his British, French and Turkish counterparts and also spoke by phone with the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, for the second time in three days. The Pentagon said Austin told Shoigu he “rejected any pretext for Russian escalation”. Without providing evidence, Shoigu said Ukraine could escalate by using a “dirty bomb” – conventional explosives laced with radioactive material. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:37:07Z'}, {'id': '635683958f08855c22ca60b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations has said urgent steps are needed to relieve a backlog of more than 150 ships involved in a deal that allows Ukraine to export grain from ports in the Black Sea. The comments by Ismini Palla, a UN spokesperson for the Black Sea Grain Initiative, come as Ukraine accused Russia of blocking the full implementation of the agreement. The deal, brokered by the UN and Turkey to facilitate Ukrainian grain shipments that it had blocked since the start of its war with Ukraine, comes up for renewal next month. Russia has threatened to pull out, claiming that the deal is not directing grain to the world’s poorest countries. Vessels carrying grains and other foodstuffs to and from Ukrainian ports must be inspected by teams organised by the four-party Joint Coordination Centre (JCC) at anchorages in Turkey. Palla said: There are currently over 150 vessels waiting around Istanbul to move and these delays have the potential to cause disruptions to the supply chain and port operations. Ukraine said Russian inspections that have been creating “significant” delays for the export of Ukrainian food products were “politically motivated” and a cause for concern. Ukraine’s foreign ministry said in a statement: We have reason to believe delays in Russia’s inspections of the grain initiative*s vessels are politically motivated. Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said Moscow had asked the UN for data on the destination and end-consumers for Ukrainian grain exports, saying that “corrections” to the agreement would depend on this information. Speaking at a press briefing broadcast on state television, Lavrov said: This is not just curiosity. The correction or redirection of further actions to implement the grain deal depend on it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T13:16:58Z'}, {'id': '63567ed38f08ff8bc54cfba8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Romania’s defence minister, Vasile Dîncu, has announced his resignation, weeks after he said Ukraine’s only chance to end the war was to negotiate with Russia. Dîncu said in a statement: My gesture (resignation) comes as it is impossible to cooperate with the Romanian president, the army’s commander-in-chief. He added: I think my withdrawal from the post is necessary so as to not harm decisions and programmes which require fluid command chains and to not block a series of projects which are absolutely necessary for … the ministry and the army. Dîncu had come under fierce criticism for suggesting that Ukraine needed international allies to negotiate security guarantees and peace with Russia. He later said his comments were taken out of context. President Klaus Iohannis said Ukrainians were paying with blood in the war and only they could decide what and when to negotiate, a position held by Romania and the EU.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:11:27Z'}, {'id': '63567a0b8f08855c22ca6032', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said only Russia would use nuclear weapons in Europe, following evidence-free allegations by the Russian defence minister that Ukraine was preparing to use a “dirty bomb” on its own territory.\nZelenskiy pointed out that Russia was using “nuclear blackmail” at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, “phosphorus munitions” and “banned anti-personnel mines against civilian infrastructure’”. He said Russia was preparing to use the very weapon it was accusing Ukraine of holding. The US and UK have dismissed Russia’s claims, with the British defence ministry cautioning against using such allegations to escalate the conflict.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:20:26Z'}, {'id': '635675a08f08855c22ca6013', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has asked the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, to send experts to Ukraine’s nuclear facilities to disprove Russian claims that Ukraine plans to use a “dirty bomb”. The UN nuclear watchdog chief had agreed to “urgently send experts to peaceful facilities in Ukraine”, he said.\nDuring his regular briefing with reporters today, the Kremlin’s Dmitry Peskov reiterated the Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu’s evidence-free claim that Ukraine is preparing to use a “dirty bomb” on its own territory as part of an escalation of the war. Peskov said: Their distrust of the information that has been provided by the Russian side doesn’t mean that the threat of using such a dirty bomb doesn’t exist. Such a threat exists, and the defense minister has given the information about it to his interlocutors. It’s up to them whether to trust it or not.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T16:52:13Z'}, {'id': '635672e68f0885fc0bbd3bb9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has claimed France and Germany have shown “no desire” to participate in mediation on Ukraine, while praising an offer by Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, to organise talks. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, and Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, have shown “no desire to listen to Russia’s position or participate in mediation efforts”, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told reporters. He added: Ankara takes a different position from that of Paris and Berlin … and has declared its readiness to continue mediation efforts.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:22:26Z'}, {'id': '635670338f08ff8bc54cfaff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from that interview with Kyrylo Budanov, the head of Ukraine’s defence intelligence directorate, who said Russia was bringing new military units into Kherson as it prepares to defend the city in the face of the advancing Ukrainian counteroffensive. Orders from the occupied city’s Russian administration for residents to evacuate are part of an “information operation and manipulation” by Moscow, Budanov told Ukrainska Pravda. He said: They are taking out cash, [internet] servers, the so-called occupation authorities … All the non-walking, seriously injured are being taken out, they are trying to discharge those who can walk as soon as possible from hospitals. They conduct this crazy information campaign that ‘we care about people’ and so on. They create the illusion that everything is gone. At the same time, on the contrary, they bring new military units there and prepare the streets of the city for defence. Budanov said Moscow was acting out of fear that Ukrainian troops might retake the Kakhovka dam, upstream from Kherson, and encircle its troops in the city. He added: They understand that if we take at least control over the Kakhovka dam, which is the only transport artery that is fully functioning now, they will have to make a decision very quickly. Either very, very quickly leave the city and get out, or they risk ending up in the same situation that our units in Mariupol found themselves in earlier. He concluded by saying: Understanding all this, they are preparing the groundwork so that, if necessary, they can get out of there very quickly. However, they are not preparing to exit now, they are preparing to defend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:23:51Z'}, {'id': '63566caa8f0885fc0bbd3b6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia would slow Ukrainian troops’ advance in the south by only about two weeks if it blows up the Kakhova hyrdoelectric dam near Kherson, according to Ukraine’s military spy chief. The comments by Kyrylo Budanov come amid growing concern that Russia is planning to blow up the large hydroelectric dam at Nova Kakhovka, upstream from Kherson, which holds back 18m cubic metres of water. Such a move would flood Russian-occupied territory and deprive Moscow of a vital water canal for annexed Crimea, Budanov said in an interview with Ukrainska Pravda. On Friday, Ukrainian defence intelligence warned that the dam had been mined and that two trucks full of explosives had been placed on top of its 30m-high walls. But Budanov, head of Ukraine’s defence ministry’s main intelligence directorate, said the dam had been only partially mined and that destroying it completely would require many tonnes of explosives. Russian forces would get “a total flooding” of the Russian-occupied left bank of Kherson, he said. He added: They will lose even theoretically the possibility of supplying water to the North Crimean Canal, to Crimea … He continued: Of course, they would complicate our advance for a certain period of time. And this, by the way, is not a very long period of time, around two weeks or thereabouts. He added that blowing up the dam would also “destroy the possibility of the existence of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant because this facility is inextricably linked to it”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:25:05Z'}, {'id': '635667358f08ff8bc54cfa90', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s just past 1.30pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where we stand: Russia’s grip on the city of Kherson appeared increasingly fragile after a weekend in which all civilians were ordered to evacuate immediately in the face of the advancing Ukrainian counteroffensive. The US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War said the urgent call indicated that the occupiers “do not expect a rapid Russian or civilian return” to the city, and appeared to be trying to depopulate it to damage its “long-term social and economic viability”. All men remaining in Kherson have been invited to join a newly formed local militia. In a notice on Telegram, the occupation authorities said men had the “opportunity” to join territorial defence units if they chose to remain in Kherson of their own free will. Compelling civilians to serve in the armed forces of an occupying power is defined as a breach of the Geneva conventions. A former chief of the British army has said Russia faces an “inevitable defeat” in Kherson ahead of an expected battle. Gen Lord Dannatt claimed Vladimir Putin’s troops are attempting to save face to make their defeat appear “less chaotic”. Dannatt also suggested Russia was targeting Ukraine’s energy infrastructure as they were “still on the back foot” on the battlefield. Concern is also growing that Russia may blow up a large hydroelectric dam at Nova Kakhovka, upstream from Kherson, which holds back 18m cubic metres of water. On Friday, Ukrainian defence intelligence warned that the dam had been mined and that two trucks full of explosives had been placed on top of its 30m-high walls. The US has rejected as “transparently false” Russia’s evidence-free claim that Ukraine is preparing to use a “dirty bomb” on its own territory as part of an escalation of Vladimir Putin’s war. Secretary of state Antony Blinken told his Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba, on Sunday “the world would see through any attempt by Russia to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation”. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy reacted swiftly to Moscow’s claims, calling for a united international response. “If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Zelenskiy said in a video address on social media. His foreign minister Kuleba denounced Moscow’s claims as “absurd” and “dangerous”. Russia continues to use Iranian uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs), otherwise known as drones, against targets throughout Ukraine, though Ukrainian efforts to defeat the Shahed-136 UAVs are increasingly successful, the UK Ministry of Defence has determined. Official sources, including Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy, claim that up to 85% of attacks are being intercepted, according to the latest British intelligence report. A Russian fighter jet crashed in Siberia, killing two crew members. The Su-30 fighter jet came down on a private, two-storey building housing two families in Irkutsk, a major industrial centre in eastern Siberia. The crash appears to reflect the growing strain that the fighting in Ukraine has put on the Russian air force. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Zaina Alibhai to bring you all the latest developments on the Russia-Ukraine war. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T12:26:06Z'}, {'id': '635662538f0885fc0bbd3ae1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations has said more needs to be done to clear a backlog of grain exports in the Black Sea. It’s claimed there are more than 150 ships waiting around Istanbul, with the delays potentially causing disruption to supply chains and port operations. The export deal, brokered by the UN and Turkey in summer, allowed Ukraine to resume exporting grain from ports in the Black Sea that had been shut down amid Russia’s invasion. Ukraine said seven vessels carrying grain had sailed from its ports on Sunday but accused Russia of blocking them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:01:51Z'}, {'id': '63565cf58f08855c22ca5f04', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian TV presenter has apologised for claiming children who opposed Russia should be drowned in a river. The Russia Today anchor Anton Krasovsky said he was “really embarrassed” after getting “carried away” with his comments. “Well, it happens. You’re on air, you get carried away, and you can’t stop. I ask for the forgiveness of everyone who was stunned by this,” he said. The state broadcaster suspended Krasovsky shortly after his remarks, and suggested the incident was a result of “temporary insanity”. Yet it appears he crossed the line, with Russia’s state investigative committee confirming it was looking into and would produce a report on the matter. The presenter’s comments came last week in a broadcast in which he was responding to an account by the science fiction author Sergei Lukyanenko about his first visit to Ukraine in the 1980s during which children told him they would live better lives were it not for Russian occupiers. “They should have been drowned in the Tysyna. Just drown those children, drown them,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:28:49Z'}, {'id': '635654e68f0885fc0bbd3a3b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A former chief of the British army has said Russia faces an “inevitable defeat” in Kherson ahead of an expected battle. Residents in the Russian-occupied region have been urged to leave, with all men who choose to stay behind being asked to join a newly formed militia. Gen Lord Dannatt has claimed Vladimir Putin’s troops are attempting to save face to make their defeat appear “less chaotic”. “The Russians are obviously thinking about trying to turn what is probably an inevitable defeat there into some kind of managed withdrawal to make it appear less chaotic from their point of view,” he told Sky News. Dannatt suggested Russia was targeting Ukraine’s energy infrastructure as they were “still on the back foot” on the battlefield.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:24:30Z'}, {'id': '63564d2b8f08ff8bc54cf973', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A leading Iranian general accused of supplying drones to Russia has reportedly mocked the European Union over sanctions. Maj-Gen Mohammad Bagheri has suggested the bloc “buy coal” for its citizens to warm their houses this winter, amid rising energy prices caused by the war. Bagheri was among three Iranian military officials sanctioned recently by the UK and European Union after claims of Iranian drones being used in attacks against Ukraine.\n“They are allowed to identify and confiscate all the properties and assets of Maj-Gen Mohammad Hossein Bagheri in banks around the world and use them to buy coal for European citizens, a difficult winter is ahead,” he is reported to have said. The chief of staff of the armed forces also described the sanctions a “mistake” similar to those the US made when it sanctioned him in 2019.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T08:48:42Z'}, {'id': '63563ebe8f08855c22ca5e1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia Today has been accused of inciting genocide after a presenter claimed children who criticised the Kremlin should be drowned. The state-controlled broadcaster last week suspended anchor Anton Krasovsky within hours of his comments, insisting nobody at RT shared his views. Its editor-in-chief, Margarita Simonyan, has since suggested the “wild and disgusting” remarks from Krasovsky – a pro-war commentator who has been sanctioned by the European Union – were a result of “temporary insanity”. Ukraine has called for a worldwide ban on RT, urging countries who had not yet done so to watch Krazovsky’s segment. “Aggressive genocide incitement (we will put this person on trial for it) which has nothing to do with freedom of speech,” foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T07:43:38Z'}, {'id': '635634388f0885fc0bbd3950', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Men in the Russian-occupied region of Kherson have been invited to join a newly formed local militia. Russian authorities have been urging residents to leave the city, fearing an attack from Ukrainian troops, and claim 25,000 residents have left since Tuesday. Kherson is one of the four regions in Ukraine that Russia annexed last month, and is key to both sides due to its proximity to the Dnieper River.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:19:51Z'}, {'id': '63562b038f08ff8bc54cf890', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia continues to use Iranian uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs), otherwise known as drones, against targets throughout Ukraine, though Ukrainian efforts to defeat the Shahed-136 UAVs are increasingly successful, the UK Ministry of Defence has determined. Official sources, including Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy, claim that up to 85% of attacks are being intercepted, according to the latest British intelligence report. Russia has urged more civilians in occupied Kherson to leave amid an exodus to escape an anticipated Ukrainian counteroffensive. Russian authorities told residents to take “documents, money, valuables and clothes” due to “the tense situation on the front” and reported on Sunday that there had been a sharp increase in the number of civilians trying to leave. About 25,000 people have been “evacuated” since Tuesday, the Interfax news agency said. Russia’s grip on Kherson appears increasingly fragile. The US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War said the urgent call to leave indicated that the occupiers “do not expect a rapid Russian or civilian return” to the city, and appeared to be trying to depopulate it to damage its “long-term social and economic viability”. One person was killed by a homemade bomb in the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson on Sunday, according to Russia-installed authorities in the region. “An improvised explosive device, attached to a street pole and detonated remotely, killed a civilian from Kherson,” local pro-Russian official Kirill Stremousov wrote on social media, adding that a passerby had been wounded, according to a report from Agence France-Presse. Russia and Ukraine have accused each other of planning to blow up the Nova Kakhovka dam. Breaching it could flood a swathe of southern Ukraine, including Kherson. Ukraine and the US denounced suggestions from Russia that Ukraine was preparing to use a “dirty bomb” as dangerous lies. “If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a video address. The White House national security council also rejected Shoigu’s claims. “The world would see through any attempt to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation,” a statement said. A Russian fighter jet crashed in Siberia, killing two crew members. The Su-30 fighter jet came down on a private, two-storey building housing two families in Irkutsk, a major industrial centre in eastern Siberia. The crash appears to reflect the growing strain that the fighting in Ukraine has put on the Russian air force. Ukraine said seven vessels sailed off from its ports on Sunday carrying grain bound for Asia and Europe, but accused Russia of blocking the full implementation of Black Sea grain deal. French president Emmanuel Macron said it’s up to Ukraine to decide the time and terms of peace with Russia, and cautioned that the end of war “can’t be the consecration of the law of the strongest.” “To stay neutral would mean accepting the world order of the strongest, and I don’t agree with this,” Macron said at the opening of a three-day peace conference in Rome on Sunday. Ukraine faces power outages after Russian strikes target energy facilities. Russian airstrikes on energy infastructure across the country have left more than a million households in Ukraine without electricity, the deputy head of the Ukrainian presidency, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, said at the weekend. A German lobby group representing companies with interests in eastern Europe has called for a plan to rebuild Ukraine that would mirror the Marshall plan that helped Europe recover from the second world war, the media group RND reported. A Ukraine-Germany business forum in Berlin on Monday will discuss the plan set to be attended by German chancellor Olaf Scholz and Ukrainian prime minister Denys Schmyhal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:26:52Z'}, {'id': '635629cf8f08ff8bc54cf886', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian’s Daniel Boffey spoke with one of the women freed in last week’s prisoner swap. It was like something from the cold war. After five months in the most notorious jail in occupied Ukraine, Alina Panina, 25, had found herself, without explanation, at the foot of a bridge over a river in no man’s land with 107 fellow female Ukrainian prisoners of war. Behind Panina lay Russian-occupied territory and her experiences of the siege of Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks, the subsequent surrender and then captivity in Olenivka prison in Donetsk. There she was witness to the aftermath of an explosion that killed 53 male prisoners, a blast said by Kyiv to have been engineered by Moscow to silence the victims of torture. Read the full story below:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T06:02:03Z'}, {'id': '63560ebd8f08ff8bc54cf7ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine said seven vessels sailed off from its ports on Sunday carrying grain bound for Asia and Europe, but accused Russia of blocking the full implementation of Black Sea grain deal. Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry said in a statement posted to Telegram on Sunday: Russia is deliberately blocking the full realisation of the Grain Initiative. As a result, these (Ukrainian) ports in the last few days are working only at 25-30% of their capacity.” The UN-backed agreement paved the way for Ukraine to resume grain exports from Black Sea ports that had been shut since Russia invaded. Moscow won guarantees for its own grain and fertiliser exports. Ukraine called for the renewal of the deal but concerns over whether Russia will agree to an extension beyond the 19 November deadline has intensified after Russia has repeatedly raised complaints about its implementation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T05:50:31Z'}, {'id': '6355c3c48f0885fc0bbd36ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some recent images to come through our newswires today show the situation currently unfolding in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:28:46Z'}, {'id': '6355cb858f08ff8bc54cf685', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is facing more power outages after Russian strikes continue to target energy facilities. Russian airstrikes on energy infrastructure across the country have left more than a million households in Ukraine without electricity, the deputy head of the Ukrainian presidency, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, said at the weekend. Zelenskiy has urged Ukrainians to conserve energy. We should consume electricity very consciously. Please remember to limit the use of unnecessary and energy-consuming appliances,” he said in his latest national address on Sunday night. It is necessary to be really frugal with energy consumption in public space.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T05:30:40Z'}, {'id': '635616348f08ff8bc54cf825', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spanish authorities moved a luxury yacht linked to the sanctioned head of Russian defence group Rostec after the shipyard where it was berthed stopped receiving payments for its repairs, a transport ministry source told Reuters news agency. The 85-metre (279ft) long yacht, that Spain has said is worth $140m, was transferred to a marina last month, the source and other officials said, highlighting the logistical challenges authorities have faced managing vessels being held across Europe because of sanctions imposed over Russia’s military actions in Ukraine. Spain ordered the ship Valerie “frozen” – meaning the vessel can not be used or sold – in March, saying it was acting on European Union sanctions. The yacht is tied to Sergei Chemezov, an ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin, a police source and another source with knowledge of the matter said.\nThe Valerie is now moored in the nearby Marina Vela marina and its name has been changed to the Meridian A, Reuters documentation checks and pictures of the vessel show. The yacht is formally owned by Chemezov’s stepdaughter, Anastasia Ignatova, according to the European Union’s sanctions list to which she was added in April. Its immobilisation was unsuccessfully challenged in Spanish courts in March by Sulberg Services Limited, a company registered as the yacht’s owner in the Equasis shipping database. Sulberg argued that Spanish authorities could not prove who owned the yacht and could therefore not freeze it. A Madrid court rejected the claim in April.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T05:40:33Z'}, {'id': '6355d1768f0885fc0bbd371a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A German lobby group representing companies with interests in eastern Europe has called for a plan to rebuild Ukraine that would mirror the Marshall plan that helped Europe recover from the second world war, the media group RND reported. A Ukraine-Germany business forum in Berlin on Monday will discuss the plan set to be attended by German chancellor Olaf Scholz and Ukrainian prime minister Denys Schmyhal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T05:10:38Z'}, {'id': '6355d2438f08855c22ca5bbd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'French president Emmanuel Macron said it’s up to Ukraine to decide the time and terms of peace with Russia, and cautioned that the end of war “can’t be the consecration of the law of the strongest.” To stay neutral would mean accepting the world order of the strongest, and I don’t agree with this,” Macron said at the opening of a three-day peace conference in Rome on Sunday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T05:03:45Z'}, {'id': '6355ceb98f08ff8bc54cf6a7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine and the US have denounced suggestions from Russia that Ukraine is preparing to use a “dirty bomb” as dangerous lies. Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu made the allegation about a dirty bomb in a round of telephone conversations with western defence chiefs. In those calls, Shoigu conveyed “concerns about possible provocations by Ukraine with the use of a ‘dirty bomb,’” the Russian defence ministry said. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Sunday sharply dismissed the claim that Kyiv was preparing to use a dirty bomb. If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Zelenskiy said in a video address.\nUS secretary of state Anthony Blinken rejected Shoigu’s “transparently false” allegations that Ukraine is preparing to use a dirty bomb on its own territory and that the world would “see through any attempt by Russia to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation” in a statement issued by the White House. A statement from US national security council spokeswoman, Adrienne Watson said, “We reject reports of minister Shoigu’s transparently false allegations that Ukraine is preparing to use a dirty bomb on its own territory. The world would see through any attempt to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation.” A so-called dirty bomb is designed to contaminate a wide area with radioactive material, making it dangerous for civilians. It does not involve a nuclear explosion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T04:57:42Z'}, {'id': '6356177a8f08855c22ca5d2d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia continues to use Iranian uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs), otherwise known as drones, against targets throughout Ukraine, though Ukrainian efforts to defeat the Shahed-136 UAVs are increasingly successful, the UK Ministry of Defence has determined. Official sources, including Ukraine’s president Zelenskiy, claim that up to 85% of attacks are being intercepted, according to the latest British intelligence report. The full report reads: These UAVs are slow, noisy and fly at low altitudes, making lone aircraft easy to target conventional air defences. Russia is likely expending a high number of Iranian Shahed-136 UAVs in order to penetrate increasingly effective Ukrainian air defences. It is likely using them as a substitute for Russian-manufactured long-range precision weapons which are becoming increasingly scarce.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T04:50:00Z'}, {'id': '635615818f0885fc0bbd38a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are a few more images we have received through the newswires today of civilians leaving the Russian-occupied Kherson region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:26:01Z'}, {'id': '635605018f08ff8bc54cf7c2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian authorities in the occupied territory of Kherson continue to urge residents to leave fearing an anticipated Ukrainian counter-offensive in the region. Since Tuesday, about 25,000 people have been “evacuated”, the Russian-installed deputy head of the region Kirill Stremousov claimed.\n“We again recommend you to leave the city and the western bank of the Dnipro,” Stremousov said in a video message published on Telegram. “We are not going to give up Kherson.” The occupied city’s Russian administration told residents to take “documents, money, valuables and clothes” due to “the tense situation on the front” and reported on Sunday that there had been “a sharp increase” in the number of civilians trying to leave. Russian-installed officials in Ukraine’s south are trying to “evacuate” up to 60,000 people living on the western bank of the Dnipro River.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:29:04Z'}, {'id': '6355ce6d8f08ff8bc54cf6a6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments as they unfold over the next few hours. Russian authorities in the occupied territory of Kherson continue to urge residents to leave fearing an anticipated Ukrainian counter-offensive in the region. Since Tuesday, about 25,000 people have been “evacuated”, the Russian-installed deputy head of the region Kirill Stremousov claimed. The US, UK and France have rejected Russia’s latest claim that Ukraine is preparing to use a “dirty bomb” on its own territory as“transparently false” and just part of an escalation of Putin’s war. Here are all the latest lines you may have missed: Russia has urged more civilians in occupied Kherson to leave amid an exodus to escape an anticipated Ukrainian counteroffensive. Russian authorities told residents to take “documents, money, valuables and clothes” due to “the tense situation on the front” and reported on Sunday that there had been “a sharp increase” in the number of civilians trying to leave. About 25,000 people have been “evacuated” since Tuesday, the Interfax news agency said. Russia’s grip on Kherson appears increasingly fragile. The US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War said the urgent call to leave indicated that the occupiers “do not expect a rapid Russian or civilian return” to the city, and appeared to be trying to depopulate it to damage its “long-term social and economic viability”. One person was killed by a homemade bomb in the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson on Sunday, according to Russia-installed authorities in the region. “An improvised explosive device, attached to a street pole and detonated remotely, killed a civilian from Kherson,” local pro-Russian official Kirill Stremousov wrote on social media, adding that a passerby had been wounded, according to a report from Agence France-Presse. Russia and Ukraine have accused each other of planning to blow up the Nova Kakhovka dam. Breaching it could flood a swathe of southern Ukraine, including Kherson. Ukraine and the US denounced suggestions from Russia that Ukraine was preparing to use a “dirty bomb” as dangerous lies. “If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a video address. The White House national security council also rejected Shoigu’s claims. “The world would see through any attempt to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation,” a statement said. A Russian fighter jet crashed in Siberia, killing two crew members. The Su-30 fighter jet came down on a private, two-storey building housing two families in Irkutsk, a major industrial centre in eastern Siberia. The crash appears to reflect the growing strain that the fighting in Ukraine has put on the Russian air force. Iran has said it will supply Russia with 40 turbines to help its gas industry amid western sanctions over Moscow’s war in Ukraine, local media reported. Iran’s “industrial successes are not limited to the fields of missiles and drones”, Iranian Gas Engineering and Development Company’s CEO, Reza Noushadi, was quoted as saying by Shana, the oil ministry’s news agency on Sunday. Ukraine’s special operations forces said that Iranian drone instructors have been spotted in Belarus. According to special operations forces, Iran’s Islamic revolutionary guard corps are training Russian forces in Belarus and coordinating the launches of Iranian-made drones. Russia fired missiles and drones into Ukrainian-held Mykolaiv on Sunday, destroying an apartment block. Mykolaiv lies roughly 35 km (22 miles) northwest of the frontline to occupied Kherson UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, rebutted claims made by the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, that Ukraine, facilitated by western counties including UK, was planning to escalate the conflict. “The defence secretary refuted these claims and cautioned that such allegations should not be used as a pretext for greater escalation,” the UK Ministry of Defence said in a statement after talks between the UK and Russia. French president Emmanuel Macron said it’s up to Ukraine to decide the time and terms of peace with Russia, and cautioned that the end of war “can’t be the consecration of the law of the strongest.” “To stay neutral would mean accepting the world order of the strongest, and I don’t agree with this,” Macron said at the opening of a three-day peace conference in Rome on Sunday. Ukraine faces power outages after Russian strikes target energy facilities. Russian airstrikes on energy infastructure across the country have left more than a million households in Ukraine without electricity, the deputy head of the Ukrainian presidency, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, said at the weekend. A German lobby group representing companies with interests in eastern Europe has called for a plan to rebuild Ukraine that would mirror the Marshall plan that helped Europe recover from the second world war, the media group RND reported. A Ukraine-Germany business forum in Berlin on Monday will discuss the plan set to be attended by German chancellor Olaf Scholz and Ukrainian prime minister Denys Schmyhal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:29:24Z'}, {'id': '635669698f0885fc0bbd3b41', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has told western counterparts that the war in Ukraine is heading for an “uncontrolled escalation” amid evidence that the Kremlin is weighing how to respond to yet another anticipated battlefield defeat around the key southern city of Kherson. With Russian troops setting up new defences for a fresh Ukrainian offensive in Luhansk in the country’s east as well, Moscow appears to be preparing the ground for yet further escalation, with discredited claims that Kyiv may be preparing to use a dirty bomb as a “false-flag operation” to blame Russia. Refuting the Russian allegation, Nato Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said in an interview on Monday: “The allegation that Ukraine is preparing to use dirty bombs in Ukraine is absurd.”\nRussian officials – including Vladimir Putin – have repeatedly hinted that the Kremlin may be prepared to use a nuclear weapon as part of its so-far failed brinkmanship to discourage Kyiv and its western allies, which have been supplying Ukraine with modern weapons, intelligence and training. However, the Kremlin continued to push the claim of a Ukrainian dirty bomb on Monday, with Igor Kirilov, head of the Armed Forces radioactive weapons unit, saying that troops had been mobilised to work in a radioactively contaminated environment. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said the threat was real. “Their distrust of the information that has been provided by the Russian side doesn’t mean that the threat of using such a dirty bomb doesn’t exist,” he told reporters. Shoigu discussed the “rapidly deteriorating situation” in phone calls with his British, French and Turkish counterparts and also spoke by phone with the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, for the second time in three days. The Pentagon said Austin told Shoigu he “rejected any pretext for Russian escalation”. Without providing evidence, Shoigu said Ukraine could escalate by using a “dirty bomb” – conventional explosives laced with radioactive material. Analysts have noted that a “dirty bomb” would have little utility for Ukraine on the battlefield, not least when its forces are currently retaking large swathes of territory by conventional means, instead interpreting Russia’s claim as a pretext for its own planned escalation.\nIn an overnight address, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said the Russian accusation was a sign that Moscow was planning such an attack itself and would blame Ukraine. “If Russia calls and says that Ukraine is allegedly preparing something, it means one thing: Russia has already prepared all this,” Zelenskiy said. “So when today the Russian minister of defence organises a phone carousel and calls foreign ministers with stories about the so-called ‘dirty’ nuclear bomb, everyone understands everything well. Understands who is the source of everything dirty that can be imagined in this war.”\nShoigu’s comments fit a worrying pattern of escalatory actions by Moscow as the tide of the war has turned against it, most recently with its targeting of civilian infrastructure with missiles and “kamikaze” drones after Kyiv’s attack on the Kerch strait bridge in Crimea earlier this month. In a joint statement after the talks, Britain, France and the US said they were committed to supporting Ukraine “for as long as it takes” and rejected Russia’s warning about a “dirty bomb”. “Our countries made clear that we all reject Russia’s transparently false allegations that Ukraine is preparing to use a dirty bomb on its own territory,” they said. “The world would see through any attempt to use this allegation as a pretext for escalation.” Nigel Gould-Davies, a senior fellow for Russia and Eurasia and the International Institute for Strategic Affairs, commented on Twitter: “It’s Russia that is escalating: attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, apparent attacks on western connectivity infrastructure, and mining of Novaya Kakhovka dam. And playing with nuclear fire in Zaporizhzhiya [nuclear power plant] for months. “So [it’s] hard to see these calls as anything other than Shoigu either doubling down on Putin’s bluffs, or preparing way for Russian nuclear use. Yes, nuclear (ie fission [rather than a dirty bomb]). A dirty bomb would breach nuclear taboo but not achieve significant effects.” He added: “I worry there is too much motivated reasoning in dismissing possible Russian nuclear use. We don’t want it to happen, and/or we don’t see the point, therefore it won’t. But Russia faces logic of dwindling choices as it loses. Escalation of all kinds more likely.” The latest threats from Moscow come as Russian forces appear to be preparing to withdraw from the east bank of the Dnieper River near Kherson, ordering a fresh evacuation of civilians, and laying the ground for the potential loss of the city of Kherson itself. About 25,000 people have been transported from the area since Tuesday, the Interfax news agency said. However, Russia-installed authorities in Kherson reported insufficient vessels to ferry people across the river at one point on Sunday, blaming a “sharp increase in the number of people wishing to leave”. The Russian education minister, Sergei Kravtsov, said in a video message: “The situation today is difficult. It’s vital to save your lives. It won’t be for long. You will definitely return.” Kyrylo Budanov, Ukraine’s military spy chief, warned that the reported transportation of civilians from Kherson was part of a Russian information campaign. While Russia is moving financial structures, equipment, vulnerable residents and wounded people from Kherson, he said, it is also reinforcing defences. “They are creating the illusion that all is lost. Yet at the same time they are moving new military units in and preparing to defend the streets of Kherson,” he told the Ukrainska Pravda online media outlet. On Monday, the region’s Russian-installed administration announced the formation of a local militia, saying that all men remaining in the city could join. Russia accused western countries of having “essentially stolen” its gold and foreign exchange reserves via sanctions. Asked by reporters about an EU proposal to transfer frozen Russian assets to Ukraine, Peskov said: “In general, a part large of our assets have been essentially stolen by specific western countries.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T17:29:04Z'}, {'id': '63563fef8f0885fc0bbd39b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has urged China and Russia to “get on side with conservation” and stop blocking nearly 4m sq km in new marine protected areas around Antarctica. Speaking at a major international meeting on Antarctic conservation in Hobart, the US assistant secretary of state, Monica Medina, said the two countries had prevented the creation of three new protected areas in Antarctic waters “for too long” and it was time to “shake up the system”.\nMedina said the declaration of protected areas in east Antarctica, the Weddell Sea and around the Western Antarctic Peninsula had been recommended by scientists and supported by other member states of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources – but China and Russia were standing in the way. “It’s time for those two countries to lower their objections to get on side with conservation,” she told the Guardian. “We don’t have time to waste, and the fact that parties are here means it’s a priority, and that Antarctica is a priority. “As much as we object to Russia’s abhorrent war in Ukraine, we have to use our chances in bodies like this to make progress on the issues that are important for the health and the wellbeing of people all across this planet.” The first day of the fortnight-long commission meeting was disrupted when nearly 20 member countries walked out in protest while a member of the Russian delegation was speaking. An Australian Antarctic Division official said Monday’s walkout was to demonstrate “strong support for Ukraine” and utter rejection of Russia’s “unilateral, illegal and immoral invasion”. Sign up for our free morning newsletter and afternoon email to get your daily news roundup The commission chair, Dr Jakob Granit, said it had been a geopolitical success that the meeting of 26 countries and the EU was being held with all members present given two of the parties were at war. He told a press conference that agreement on marine protected areas “might be difficult” despite the conservation proposals having been planned for years and based on “scientifically sound” evidence. “Not all members are seeing the full value of those at this time, yet,” Granit said. But Medina said countries turning up for the annual meeting was not enough. “We will continue to push to make progress here and do our very best to put the conditions in place that would allow for a total consensus on the creation of marine protected areas this year – and if not at this meeting, within this year,” she said.\nAustralia’s environment minister, Tanya Plibersek, said increasing the number of marine protected areas around Antarctica was a priority to ensure ecosystem and species conservation and to help address the impacts of climate change. “To protect the Antarctic environment is to protect the future of the planet,” she said. The commission, known as Ccamlr (pronounced “camelar”), was established by an international treaty and has been meeting in Tasmania since 1982. It has had only occasional success – notably a breakthrough agreement to create a 1.5m sq km marine park in the Ross Sea. Several other protected areas have been delayed as the member countries failed to reach a consensus. An east Antarctic marine protected area was proposed by Australia and the EU in 2012 to protect about 1m sq km that is home to distinctive deep-water flora and fauna and includes feeding areas for marine mammals and seabirds, including penguins. A Weddell Sea marine protected area has been proposed since 2016 and a Domain 1 protected area, covering the Western Antarctic Peninsula and the South Scotia Arc, has been considered since 2018. This fortnight’s meeting will also consider the management of fisheries for krill and toothfish, reducing the impact of fishing on marine mammals and seabirds and how to deal with climate change.\nNon-government organisations called on the commission members to take urgent action to “safeguard Antarctica’s iconic wildlife”. The Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition said it was 10 years past a deadline the commission had set itself to establish a network of marine protected areas in the region, and warned industrial krill fishing was hurting Antarctic ecosystems. Andrea Kavanagh, from the Pew Charitable Trusts, said virtually every animal species in Antarctica either relied on krill for survival or fed on a species that ate krill. “Worryingly, we have seen a concentration of krill fishing in recent years, with most of the catch taken from small, nearshore areas,” she said. “Ccamlr must agree on measures to ensure that this fishing does not compete with the feeding grounds of krill predators, including penguins and whales.” The meeting, which is mostly held behind closed doors, is due to finish on 4 November.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T10:24:25Z'}, {'id': '635694ca8f0885fc0bbd3d78', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As Rishi Sunak prepares to become the UK’s next prime minister at the start of the festival of Diwali – when Hindus pray to the goddess Lakshmi for prosperity and success – in India some Hindus celebrated the fact that someone sharing their religion had reached such high office in the UK. “To have a Hindu inside 10 Downing Street is something astonishing and of great joy, and that too on Diwali,” said Satish Verma, a supermarket owner in Delhi. “Although he is British, it will make us Hindus proud that one of us made it so big.” Sunak, who will be the UK’s first prime minister of colour and the first Hindu prime minister, has made his commitment to his faith clear by performing puja, an act of worship, and by taking the oath as an MP on the Hindu religious text, the Bhagavad Gita. For the architect Shashank Jain, though, Sunak’s faith is irrelevant. It is simply a matter of pride that someone of Indian heritage has reached the highest office in another country. “It is definitely a moment of national pride and my only hope is that he will bring in good policies for relations between India and Britain, although this may be misplaced as, after all, he belongs to that country, not India,” said Jain. Although Indians are usually eager to claim the accomplishments of Indians based abroad as their own and take pride in them – whether it’s Indians heading Google and Microsoft or Kamala Harris becoming the US vice-president – the difference with Sunak is that his connections with India are more tenuous, given he was born and raised in England. There is no village or town in India that journalists can rush to in order to interview aunts, uncles or teachers about what little Rishi was like as a child or describe the environment he grew up in. Unlike Harris, who has relatives in south India, it’s believed Sunak has no relatives in India. His only relatives in the country are his parents-in-law, who are well known thanks to the company Infosys, which his father-in-law, Narayana Murthy, co-founded and built into a software giant. Murthy retired in 2011 and he and his wife, Sudha, have been leading a quiet, private and modest life in a small flat in Bangalore, south India, filled with books and music and not commenting on issues of the day. It is unlikely they will talk to the press about Sunak, knowing that every word might trigger a controversy for their son-in-law, particularly after the row over the non-dom tax status of his wife, Akshata Murty. Sunak’s religion may be seized on by elements of the Hindu right, according to Suhel Seth, a marketing expert and managing partner of Counselage. He said they could “appropriate” his victory on social media as some sort of vindication of India’s Hindu nationalist government. “The Hindu right will say: ‘Look, an Indian-origin man took over as PM on Diwali and so it means the Hindu gods have blessed him,’” Seth said. “And the extreme Hindu right will say: ‘It means India has arrived globally and it is thanks to Modi raising India’s standing in the world that we have ‘reverse colonialism’, as in the formerly ruled now ruling the former ruler, Britain.” Rakesh Tripathi, a spokesperson for the ruling Bharatiya Janata party, welcomed Sunak’s victory and, while praising Modi in the same breath for “elevating” India’s image in the world, did not suggest any cause-and-effect. “I am proud as an Indian to see an Indian-origin prime minister of Britain and my only hope is that he will be good for bilateral relations,” Tripathi said. For the columnist and author Kancha Iliaih Shepherd, it was a question of fascination over what possible dichotomies lay ahead for Britain with a Hindu prime minister. “Apart from the obvious question of how it will affect UK-India relations, the deeper questions are what will it do to Britain’s civilisational ethos and more broadly, to the western ethos? Liz Truss read from the Bible for the queen’s funeral service at Westminster Abbey. Will Sunak be able to do the same? It opens up a host of other questions,” Shepherd said. As Hindus light their diyas, clay lamps, and burst firecrackers on Monday night, some will feel their cup truly runneth over: India defeated Pakistan in a match in the T20 World Cup in Australia on Sunday and now Sunak is to be prime minister.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-24T14:27:03Z'}]}