{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘A war crime’: two young boys among Ukrainians shot dead during attempted evacuation', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-03T07:52:13Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/02/i-realised-my-husband-was-dead-ukrainians-tell-of-russian-army-atrocities', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kyiv', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyiv'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'War crimes', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/law/war-crimes'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Daniel Boffey', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daniel-boffey'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '6245b30e8f081c355fe42df3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One in five women who ask for a pay rise are successful in receiving one compared with just under a third of men, polling has found. A YouGov survey of more than 16,000 adults found that of the 40% of people who asked for a pay rise, just over a quarter succeeded. But disparities are revealed when breaking down the data along gender lines. Forty-three per cent of men asked for a pay rise, compared with a third (33%) of women. Furthermore, 31% of men were successful, while just over a fifth (21%) of women received a salary increase. The research found the chasm exists most prominently for those in their 30s and older. For 18- to 29-year-olds in work, 18% of men and 16% of women have asked for a pay rise and received at least one. However, for adults in their 30s, just under a third (31%) of men who asked for a pay rise were successful, compared with 19% of women. These disparities further existed along class lines, with the analysis finding that adults in more middle-class occupations are more likely to have asked for a pay rise and been successful than their counterparts in more working-class occupations. The YouGov analysis comes after gender pay gap reporting was made mandatory by the government in 2017 for all companies with more than 250 employees. In December, Guardian analysis showed that the gender pay gap reported to the government by the UK’s largest firms is widening, with women being paid a median hourly rate of 10.2% less than their male colleagues. Jemima Olchawski, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said the UK had a “pernicious gender pay gap that needs to be tackled”. She continued: “Detailed academic research disputes the idea that women are less likely to ask for a pay rise and instead finds that they ask at a similar rate, but typically get slightly less. “That said, it’s simply not right that women continue to be undervalued for the work they do – be that in paid work or caring responsibilities. “This research suggests that a gender gap in asking opens in our 30s. That’s when most mothers have their first children – and with so many flexible working requests refused, we know too many mums feel precarious enough in getting work they can do, let along getting a raise. What you come into a job with matters too – it’s not just about pay rises and bonuses.” Anthony Painter, the director of policy at the Chartered Management Institute, said the “confidence gap” was real and had “detrimental impacts for pay and progression for women”. “You have to question whether the knock-back figures we see in this research are part of the reason,” he added. A spokesperson from the government’s equalities hub said: “This government is committed to addressing pay inequality. Through our new pay transparency pilot, we will support organisations to provide salary details as standard on job advertisements.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-03T16:10:54Z'}, {'id': '624962708f081c355fe4484a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was, said Taras Schevchenko, like a scene from a film. At 6am on the morning of 24 February, from the vantage point of the kitchen window of his fifth-storey apartment overlooking Gostomel airport, on the northern outskirts of the Ukrainian town of Bucha, Schevchenko watched as about 20 Russian helicopters flew into vision, spilling paratroopers on to the tarmac below. “I felt as if I was in the movies, you know, I saw all the helicopters, I even saw the faces of those paratroopers.” This was the moment that the war began for Bucha, a town 17 miles north-west from the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, which is swiftly becoming synonymous with the worst atrocities of Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine. The events that unfolded over the following days, Schevchenko, 43, said, were unimaginable.\nBodies rolled over by tanks turned into “human rugs” while Russians shot dead even the elderly who got in their way, he said. Russian snipers shot the men who tried to escape across fields, it is claimed, and claims of the rapes and murder of young girls, which have yet to be independently verified, put terror in the hearts of those who remained.\nAs witnesses have come forward, however, and photographic evidence of bodies on Bucha’s roads has emerged from the newly recaptured territory, the claims of mass war crimes by the occupying Russian troops appear to be all too real. On Sunday, Ukraine’s military published footage of what appeared to be a torture chamber in a basement, with a barracks in an adjoining room. A line of bodies were found, hands tied. They were crouched facing a wall. The military said at least one victim’s kneecaps had been shot first before he received a bullet to the head. Mass graves containing 280 bodies were also found around the town after the initial discovery on Saturday of 20 bodies by the side of a road. “All these people were shot,” Bucha’s mayor, Anatoly Fedoruk, said.\nSchevchenko, a martial arts coach in a kindergarten, and his mother, Yevdokia Shevchenko, 77, with whom he lived in the north of Bucha, recalls that it had gone quiet for three days after Putin’s troops landed. They talked about what to do, whether they should escape. Those few who decided to leave on that first day were seen as overreacting by the majority of those in Schevchenko’s block. The normality of those first 72 hours was an illusion. “We saw them [the Russians] on the third day when there was a massive shootout by our building with Bucha’s territorial defence. At first I decided to stay because I was thinking: where to go? I had nowhere to go. There was fear, you know. Secondly, we aren’t that rich to completely change our lives in one day. On the third day, I realised that it is too late to run away somewhere or change something because the war was literally around my house, on my street. There were tanks driving down my street. It is very frightening when they shoot, it’s such a sound, a roar.” By day four, there was panic. “Everybody was looking [for] some ways out of there on the internet, Telegram or Viber chats. Anyone who had their own cars just fled, risking everything. Our building has 69 apartments and there are only four families remaining.” Schevchenko’s mother, Yevdokia, terrified by the fighting on her doorstep, moved down into the block’s damp cold basement of just 20 sq metres, lit only by candles, where she joined eight other families, including one three-year-old child and an 86-year-old woman.\nYevdokia would stay there for the next 13 days and nights, with only a bucket as a toilet. The older woman, Schevchenko said, may still be in the basement. “She hugged an icon. All the time she was there she was hugging the icon.” On the fifth day, the gas supply to the town was cut off. “People understood that we needed to boil water somehow or cook some soup or something and by the entrance to the building we made a kind of cooking place. It was just a campfire with two bricks on the side.” The conversations by the fire were filled with talks of the latest dead. “Dead bodies were just lying in the streets, they didn’t let us move them,” said Schevchenko. He recounted one killing, which could not be independently verified. “There was some grandpa, he was walking with his wife, they were about to cross the street, they were stopped by some Russians. You know how these old men are, just like to talk back and stuff. So they just shot him, and to the woman they said: ‘You just keep walking.’ She rushed to her husband and started crying, and they said: ‘If you want to lie next to him, we can shoot you too.’ She told them she needed to take the body, but they said: ‘No, just keep walking.’ And she kept on walking, crying and walking. It happened next to a McDonald’s, 30-40 metres away from my home.”\nThe woman, distraught, approached Yevdokia and others who were standing nearby, struggling to catch her breath and tell her story, desperate to retrieve her husband’s body. “That old man aggressively said something to a soldier and they shot him dead, and ordered the woman to leave,” said Yevdokia. “I don’t know their names but I would see them around the town in a store, on a market, you know, familiar faces. When he got shot I was outside, I heard the gunshots. I had gone out of the basement to breathe some air.” By 9 March, Schevchenko knew they had to get out – but they appeared to be trapped. “I started to analyse all the possible ways to escape but I am glad I didn’t try then. Because other people who were braver than I was, fled and were shot. Some of them came back wounded but some remained in their cars forever, dead.” The following day, the Russians agreed to establish a humanitarian corridor for the evacuation of civilians. There was an exodus – but the Russians said they would permit only women and children to leave. “But we had neighbours one floor below and there was a man and I heard that he had managed to get out so I thought if he managed to do it, why can’t I? So, on 11 March, I woke up at 6am, and charged my phone. I found a place to charge it. Just a little though to 6-7%. Then I ran to the basement to pick up my mum. I remember very clearly it was 8.45am, I ran in and shouted: ‘Mum, we are running away,’ and at that moment there was shooting.” His mother’s first thought was for the family pet. “She said: ‘Did you get Mary?’ I said: ‘Yes, she is [in] my jacket.’ It’s a small fluffy dog, just 4 kilos. So we ran to the city hall for the green corridor. But at the city hall, they only let women and children through, so we decided that mum would go by a green corridor and I would join other men and we would walk to Romanivka, it’s about 12km away from Bucha, but you had to cross the river and peatlands and it was minus 9 degrees outside that day”. At 10am, Schevchenko started to walk, not on the roads, instead on the fields, with around 20 other men. Bullets started to buzz past them. Some went down, hit and wounded. Others, including Schevchenko, ran and tried to hide from what were assumed to be snipers. “We couldn’t even help the wounded because once you come close to someone who fell you can get shot too. There were fewer and fewer of us. I was constantly looking back and sideways. We didn’t care about each other and didn’t pay attention to each other. Just some animal instincts took over. I felt like I was a concentration camp escapee.” The route took them through Irpin, another town where alleged atrocities have been recorded since the Russians have withdrawn. Schevchenko made his way to the town’s central cemetery, through a forest there and then turned towards the village of Stoyanka leading to his destination of Romanivka.\n“The mayor of Irpin said the other day that they have collected 17 dead bodies,” said Schevchenko. “I can’t say there were only 17. There were way more. Lots of them were just sitting in their cars. Lots of them were lying on the sidewalks, there were a lot of them squashed by tanks. Like those animal skin rugs and the smell was unbearable. They were lying like that for 10 days or so.” For seven hours, Schevchenko ran, walked and hid, in the hope of reaching relative safety. “Then we saw our soldiers. They knew we were refugees, they just asked us to show them our passports and showed us the way. Buses were waiting for us.” Today, he has no idea how many of the 20 or so men who set off made it. “You know, not only did I not look, I forgot how to breathe. I literally forgot you could breathe through your nose. I was breathing through my mouth, my heart jumping out of my chest. My dog, in my jacket, was nervous and stressed.” He was taken by bus to Kyiv’s main railway station where he was reunited with his mother. “You know when I got to safety and some time passed, I felt like it was a prank,” Schevchenko said. “It just can’t be 15km away and it’s quiet. I felt like I was in the movie [The] Matrix. Like someone dragged me by my hair and threw me into this Matrix for 16 days and have been watching how I act. And later they felt sorry for me, pulled me out of there back to the peaceful world, patted me on my head and told me: ‘Good, you survived.’” • This article was amended on 4 April 2022 to correct the distance between Bucha and Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-04T16:39:02Z'}, {'id': '62499c0c8f081c355fe449cd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A UN-brokered two-month ceasefire in Yemen was broadly holding on its first full day with oil shipments reaching the port of Hodeida, including some ships that have been barred from entering for 88 days. The ceasefire is the biggest step forward in the six-year war and is intended to apply inside and outside the country’s borders. In a statement, the UN special envoy Hans Grundberg stressed the importance of building on the agreement to restore trust between the warring parties and resume a political process aimed at ending the conflict. He hopes such a relatively long ceasefire provides an opportunity to develop full peace talks, and to start to address some of the underlying economic problems prolonging the conflict. “The aim of this truce is to give Yemenis a necessary break from violence, relief from the humanitarian suffering, and most importantly hope that an end to this conflict is possible,” Grundberg said. The terms of the truce include facilitating the entry of 18 fuel ships into the ports of Hodeida and allowing two commercial flights a week to and from Sana’a airport to predetermined destinations. The terms also include convening a meeting between the parties to agree on opening roads in the city of Taiz and elsewhere to improve civilians’ freedom of movement inside Yemen. “My heartfelt congratulations to all Yemenis on the start of the holy month of Ramadan,” Grundberg said. “I hope the onset of this truce will give Yemenis a chance to celebrate the holy month in peace, safety and tranquility.” The ceasefire coincided with the separate Gulf Cooperation Council-sponsored talks between many of the warring parties in the Saudi capital, Riyadh. Those talks are not being attended by the Houthi rebel group that claimed responsibility for further attacks last week on Saudi Aramco sites inside Saudi Arabia. The British ambassador to Yemen, Richard Oppenheim, urged the Houthis to join the talks in Riyadh, adding that the aim was to turn the ceasefire into something permanent. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, on Saturday expressed hope for a “political process” to bring peace to the impoverished country. “You must take that momentum in order to make sure that this truce is fully respected and that it is renewed and … that a true political process is launched,” he said. “This demonstrates that even when things look impossible, when there is the will to compromise, peace becomes possible,” Guterres added. The US special envoy for Yemen, Tim Lenderking, claimed the ceasefire was the product of a change in battlefield dynamics and a realisation by the Iran-backed Houthis that they cannot win militarily. “We would like to see Iran move away from the negative tactics and role they have played up this point,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-03T14:28:44Z'}, {'id': '624989c18f08df8dc5563f48', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the unexpected clash between an anti-immigration French politician and a sporting hero whose parents emigrated to France, the final result was clear: Zemmour 0 – Zidane 1. A week from the first round of the French presidential election, the extreme-right candidate found himself given a red card and sent off when he turned up for a kick-about at the Z5 five-a-side football club in Aix-en-Provence set up by the former French international Zinedine Zidane. Eric Zemmour, wearing a smart new kit including pristine knee-high socks, had barely touched the ball when Zidane’s brother, Noureddine, who runs the sports centre, blew the whistle. “Get them out of here. All of them,” Zidane said. As club staff tried to clear the pitch, Zemmour told the film crews accompanying him: “I don’t know what’s happening, we’re playing well, it’s great,” he said, adding: “We’ve rented the stadium.” A film of the exchange shows staff promising to reimburse the €160 fee paid for by an unnamed member of Zemmour’s political team, campaigning under the slogan “Reconquête” (Reconquer) to rent the pitch for two hours. “We don’t have the right to play here? Well, that says everything,” Zemmour added before leaving. Noureddine Zidane reportedly defended his decision, saying Zemmour had not been upfront or warned them he was coming with the media in tow. He said the sports centre did not want its image associated with the extreme-right candidate. “You see, in France there are not only no-go areas, but no-football areas too,” Zemmour told La Provence newspaper. Earlier, Zemmour had paid an impromptu visit to a flea market in the north of Marseille, home to a large immigrant population, where the candidate was booed after suggesting the sellers were “mostly illegal” who should be “sent back home”. Zemmour was also asked by local church authorities not to hold a press conference in front of the Notre-Dame de la Garde basilica that overlooks the city. “Marseille is shattered by immigration … if we do nothing, the whole of France will be like Marseille a city drowned by immigration and partly Islamised,” he told journalists. Some French media questioned whether Zemmour had set out to be provocative. “By going to a sporting complex run by the brother of Zinedine Zidane, was Eric Zemmour looking to make a buzz?” asked Le Parisien newspaper. Zemmour is standing in the presidential election on an anti-immigration platform and wants to set up a ministry for remigration to deport 1 million “foreigners” from France. Zinedine Zidane, nicknamed “Zizou”, was born in Marseille, the youngest of five siblings of Algerian parents who emigrated to Paris in 1953. He is a hugely popular figure in France where he won 108 caps and led the country to victory in the 1998 World Cup, earning him a Legion d’honneur. He also received the Golden Ball for player of the tournament at the 2006 World Cup won by Italy after a penalty shootout, despite being sent off in the final for an uncharacteristic outburst in which he headbutted Marco Materazzi in the chest after the Italian player insulted his sister. Regarded by some as one of the greatest footballers of all time, Zidane is now a football manager.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-03T13:54:02Z'}, {'id': '6249864b8f08df8dc5563f34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Voting has begun in Hungary in a general election that has been overshadowed by the war in neighbouring Ukraine, with the country’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, seeking a fourth successive term while facing accusations of siding with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. In plummeting temperatures and a mixture of rain and snow that could affect turnout, a steady stream of voters cast ballots after polling stations opened at 6am in an election that has triggered concerns of possible fraud and the outcome of which could determine Hungary’s direction at a pivotal moment in international affairs. Opinion surveys have shown a tight race after opposition parties coalesced into a six-party bloc, United for Hungary, in an effort to end Orbán’s self-proclaimed “illiberal” reign. The ruling Fidesz party nevertheless appeared to be on course to retain power, perhaps with a significantly reduced majority.\nYears of gerrymandering and election rule changes have prompted the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to send a 200-strong monitoring team, only the second time it has done so for a poll in an EU member state. Experts have projected that the opposition needs an advantage in the popular vote of about 5% to win a majority in Hungary’s 199-member parliament. Fears of fraud mounted after a large number of ballots – most of them said to be for opposition candidates – were reportedly found partly burnt in a sack at a landfill site last week in the Romanian region of Transylvania, where many ethnic Hungarians have dual citizenship and voting rights. “The elections … will not be fair. The system favours Fidesz,” said Dominik Istrate, a Hungarian political analyst for the Central European Association, based at Corvinus University of Budapest, in a post on Twitter. “If irregularities committed by Orbán skyrocket, the opposition could choose to reject the results,” he wrote. “Rejecting the election results would trigger a major political crisis so far unprecedented in the EU.” Orbán dismissed predictions of fraud, telling journalists on Sunday: “This is a clean and fair election. Everyone had their chance to convince the voters.”\nHe appeared less comfortable responding to fresh criticism from the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who has repeatedly challenged the Hungarian leader over a perceived lack of support and a preference for Russia in its invasion of Ukraine. In his latest video address, Zelenskiy described Orbán as the “only leader in Europe who openly supports Mr Putin”. “Mr Zelenskiy is not voting today,” Orbán said. The Hungarian opposition leader, Péter Márki-Zay, a 49-year-old economist who has been depicted by Orbán as a warmonger seeking to send troops to Ukraine, concluded his campaign by saying that “Orbán has brought shame on our nation in the world”. He said a vote for the opposition would be a vote to root Hungary in Europe and the EU. At a polling station in a converted doctor’s surgical practice in Szondi Street in central Budapest, Judith Berki, 45, echoed Márki-Zay’s message of shame when explaining her decision to vote for United for Hungary. “Orban is stealing and creating enemies. … When I’m abroad, I don’t want to say I’m Hungarian.” Agnes, 69, a retired biology and chemistry teacher, had a different view. “I voted for Orbán because I’m Hungarian and nationalist, not fascist.” Referring to events in Ukraine, she said: “Every war is terrible. But we don’t want to be in this war.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-03T13:12:27Z'}, {'id': '624936d68f08224285c9f83d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'From Mykolaiv to Kyiv and Kharkiv, second-hand cars, pickup trucks and minivans bought in Britain and still bearing the familiar UK number plates are on the frontline of the war in Ukraine. The incongruous sight is thanks to a fighters’ fund established by Serhiy Prytula, 40, a Ukrainian actor and comedian, who made his name with a Little Britain-style sketch show Faina Yukraina (Nice Ukraine) but now acts as an alternative quartermaster to the Ukrainian armed forces. The British vehicles are attractively priced, roughly half the cost of their equivalent makes on mainland Europe, as right-hand cars are not in high demand internationally, according to Prytula, speaking in his office in his headquarters in Kyiv, a six-storey office building taken over for the purposes of acting as a collection and distribution centre for donations. He estimates that he currently receives about £7m a month in donations with which to stockpile and distribute military equipment, ranging from bulletproof vests and thermal telescopes to binoculars, drones, medical kits and electrical generators.\nWith a portion of those funds, the British cars are bought from both second-hand dealerships and individuals in the UK who will offer them for a cut price, sometimes accepting cryptocurrency as payment, before being ferried across the Channel and driven to Ukraine on the back of trucks – a journey of five to six days. They are then distributed across to the frontline to where Ukraine’s forces are most in need. Twenty British cars have been dispatched so far – the vehicles have been given the nickname “hell rides” by the volunteers in Kyiv – and a further 20 are in the process of being purchased. The Prytula volunteer hub has passed a total of 60 vehicles from across Europe to the armed forces. In Prytula’s office, there are fragments of a Russian jet, weapons and bloodstained military clothing, including a balaclava and gloves taken from Russian soldiers killed on the battlefield. He described the grisly collection as “feedback” as to the value of the cars. He said: “It’s really helped because our units create mobile groups. And behind you, you can see a piece of Russian jet Su-34. That’s exactly a gift from our soldiers. We help them with a pickup and he destroyed this Russian plane and this was something like feedback for us.\n“The first thing that they brought here was this piece of shit Russian jet and a piece of Russian Kalibr rocket and after that, I made a post on Facebook and I said you can bring here everything you want, ‘But no dead Russians here.’ The next day they brought clothing, a radio transmitter and hat from a Russian tank driver and after that they started sending everything they found on the bodies.” Maksym Kostetskyi, who has been managing the purchase of vehicles from the UK, said demand from Ukrainian units was three times the level of supply, with units seeking cars, pickup trucks and SUVs. He said: “There is a long waiting list. But we are very hopeful in that we have partners in the United Kingdom who are giving and providing the vehicles with lower prices. “Especially for pickup trucks and used vehicles mostly. Yes, and these SUVs are usually like £4,000 or £5,000 each. Usually in Europe, people don’t buy them because they have right-hand drive, but during this time in the war times and in the field this is a great time to buy them.” British cars were also used when Russian forces first invaded the east of Ukraine in 2014. “A lot of Ukrainian soldiers, they know how to drive this car with the steering wheel on the other side,” Prytula said. When the cars are formally taken over by the Ukrainian army, their number plates will be blacked out. But in the early weeks of the war that has rarely happened, with the priority being to get the cars in action rather than deal with the paperwork. Kostetskyi said: “We have partners over there that want to help Ukrainians and want to support all of us all the way they can. And we do believe that this is one of the biggest ways that the society and people of United Kingdom could support us as buying the same cars in other countries in the European Union costs twice as much.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-03T12:42:20Z'}, {'id': '62471b358f08224285c9eb7e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is nearly 5,000 miles from the scrub and deserts of south-west Sudan to the urbane, calm capital of the Netherlands, and a journey that Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman never thought he would make. Eighteen years ago, the 65-year-old was a “feared and revered” commander of a brigade of the infamous Janjaweed militia, paramilitaries deployed alongside Sudanese government forces to carry out a scorched-earth campaign against rebels and their communities that the UN says left 300,000 people dead and displaced 2.5 million. On Tuesday, Abd-al-Rahman, who is also known as Ali Kushayb, will appear before the international criminal court (ICC) to face 31 charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity including murder, rape and torture. If the three judges decide that he is guilty, the man once known among the Janjaweed as “the colonel of colonels” could spend the rest of his life behind bars. Campaigners have described a landmark in the struggle to bring perpetrators of mass killings in sub-Saharan Africa to justice. Human Rights Watch, the global campaign group, said: “This trial is the first time a leader will be held to account for serious crimes allegedly committed in Darfur, albeit 18 years after the crimes began. [It] … is also the first by the ICC on crimes committed by state forces and allied militias in Darfur, and shows that those who commit crimes can still face justice, even over a decade later.” The trial comes at a difficult time in Sudan, where a civilian-led transition to democracy that followed the fall of dictator Omar al-Bashir in 2019 was derailed by a military coup in October. A humanitarian crisis is unfurling across swaths of the country as inflation touches more than 250% annually.\nSince taking power, Sudan’s new rulers have snuffed any hopes that democracy might take hold after decades of dictatorship. Repeated demonstrations against military rule have been broken up with teargas and live fire, with at least 93 deaths. On Thursday a 23-year-old protester was shot in the chest as thousands marched towards the presidential palace in central Khartoum before dispersing amid teargas and bullets. Some protesters carried signs reading “April 6”, referring to further protests planned this week to mark the anniversary of the largest demonstrations against al-Bashir three years ago. “There is a very strong sentiment about rejecting military rule but the military is completely refusing to release its grip on power. There is a zero-sum mentality. No one is willing to negotiate or compromise,” said Maram Mahdi, an analyst at the Institute for Security Studies in Pretoria, South Africa. Abd-al-Rahman has been in the ICC’s custody since June 2020, when he gave himself up in a remote corner of northern Central African Republic, near the country’s border with Sudan. He had fled Sudan following the fall of Bashir to avoid trial on charges of murder, rape and other serious offences that carry a death penalty there.\nThe then chief ICC prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, said Abd-al-Rahman’s surrender and transfer into the court’s custody nearly two decades after the Darfur conflict began was “a powerful and sombre reminder that the victims of atrocity crimes in the Darfur region of Sudan have waited too long to see justice done”. At subsequent pre-trial hearings last year Bensouda said she would show that he had led attacks on towns and villages and was implicated in more than 300 murders and raids that forced 40,000 mainly ethnic Fur civilians from their homes. “The evidence shows that Mr Abd-al-Rahman was a knowing, willing and energetic perpetrator of these crimes,” Bensouda told the hearing. Abd-al-Rahman did not respond in detail to any of the allegations against him but told the court: “What I heard does not apply to me.” Though Sudan is not a party to the ICC, a UN resolution requires the government to cooperate with the court. But the political turmoil means the chances of bringing further fugitives sought by the ICC to The Hague are slim. One is the former dictator Bashir, who is wanted on charges of genocide. Two other suspects are senior figures from al-Bashir’s rule: Abdel-Rahim Mohammed Hussein, interior and defence minister during much of the conflict, and Ahmed Haroun, a security chief at the time and later the leader of al-Bashir’s ruling party. Haroun is believed to be in custody in Sudan, but the whereabouts of Hussein are unknown. Sudan’s transitional government, which took office in 2019 after Bashir fell, promised to cooperate and approved the transfer of the three wanted men to the ICC.\nHowever, many of those now occupying positions of power are themselves implicated in the horrific violence in the restive region. Thousands of veterans of the Janjaweed militia have joined the feared paramilitary Rapid Support Forces, commanded by Gen Mohamed Hamdan Daglo, who is now the de facto deputy leader of Sudan and seen by many as the most influential man in the country. “The signals at the moment point much more to obstruction [of the ICC] than continued cooperation,” said Mahdi. • This article was amended on 5 April 2022. The case began on Tuesday, not Thursday as stated in an earlier version.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-05T10:12:13Z'}, {'id': '624855428f081c355fe442df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The removal of free Covid tests is an “anti-business” measure that risks hitting the economy as it faces spiralling costs and uncertainty, ministers have been warned. Some workplaces are already seeing teams hit hard by Covid absences, after the number of infections reached its highest level on record last week. Official data suggests almost 5 million people have the disease, or one in 13 of the population. It comes with businesses already facing spiralling costs, as well as higher national insurance payments from this month. Employees are also being faced with a decision over when to test. There are now concerns that the withdrawal of free Covid tests for most people in England last Friday will lead to high levels of absences that could be avoided, causing more disruption of businesses already struggling. There are pleas for a rethink, with concerns that smaller businesses, as well as hospitality, could be heavily affected. “The Westminster government needs to understand that we are still living through Covid rather than with it, and change their approach to again provide tests free of charge,” said Dan Shears, the GMB union’s health and safety officer. “The cost of providing tests will likely be dwarfed by the productivity cost of millions of preventable infections.” Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, said that the government had created a “perfect storm” for the economy and workers. “Ending free Covid tests in the middle of a cost of living crisis is terrible for family budgets and for public health,” she said. “With cases soaring again, the last thing workers should be worrying about is how they are going to afford tests. But that’s the position many frontline and low-paid staff have been put in.” Some unions are now calling on employers to help bear the costs of testing, as they would benefit from the lower absences. “It isn’t appropriate for workers to bear the cost of Covid testing to be able to go to work each day,” said Shears. “Workers do not buy their own PPE, and they should not buy their own tests.” Senior NHS figures are concerned that the lower Covid hospitalisation rate is creating complacency. Some health figures said they were seeing their most difficult period of the pandemic, while hospital cases in some areas were still weeks away from peaking. Scientists expect infections from the Omicron coronavirus variant known as BA.2 to fall by the end of this month.\n“There’s clearly lots of other things going on – I think that is lulling the public into a bit of a false sense of security,” said Dr Layla McCay, director of policy at NHS Confederation. “Thanks to vaccines, people with Omicron are less likely to need hospital care but a small proportion always will. A small proportion of a giant number is still a pretty big number, and lots of our members are seeing it rising still. “In previous waves of Covid, there’s been a national appreciation of the challenge the NHS is currently encountering and mitigations have been taken. Right now, the NHS is in a confusing scenario where they know they are under huge pressure due to Covid but they’re also being expected to deliver on recovery plans, when they might not necessarily feel they’re at that stage.” The Lib Dems calculated that pub owners, already struggling through the pandemic and facing rising costs including the return of a 20% VAT rate, could face a bill for £4,000 a year to provide testing for their staff should they choose to do so. “The decision to scrap free tests is anti-business,” said Daisy Cooper, the Lib Dem health spokesperson. “This government has lost touch with the harsh reality faced by business owners who just want to stay safe and stay open. Yet again, small businesses are being shafted by this government’s nonsensical Covid policies.” Meanwhile, teachers warned that free tests were being axed and self-isolation rules relaxed in a way that was confusing and mis-timed. Dr Mary Bousted, joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: “Children who are ‘unwell and have a high temperature’ should stay at home until they no longer have a high temperature. “Adults who do test positive are being advised to ‘try to stay at home’ for five days, and children for three. This confusing guidance is a recipe for even more chaos and will make managing cases and preventing disruption of pupils’ education even harder than it already is.” Health department officials pointed out that the testing, tracing and isolation budget had cost more than £15.7bn in 2021-22. They said the population’s protection from Covid was now high enough to reduce the costs, as a result of vaccinations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-02T17:23:44Z'}, {'id': '624814508f08df8dc55637a6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Halyna Tovkach, 55, is searching for the body of her husband, Oleg, 62. His death, she says, is part of a war crime in which Russian soldiers also killed two young boys and their mother. The incident is said to have happened at 7.15 on the morning of 5 March in Bucha, a town north-west of Kyiv, when two families who were neighbours on Ivana Rudenka street tried to escape their hell. It is, Halyna said, a story she wants the world to hear. The two families, terrified by the constant shelling and indiscriminate fire that has marked the Russian invasion of Ukraine, had decided to leave Bucha, a town of about 30,000 people, just days earlier.\nFood and drink was packed, a route to the western Ukrainian village of Romanivka was planned. They would travel in convoy. In the front car, a white Ford, were Oleksandr Chykmariov, 42, his wife, Margarita, 33, and their two boys, Matvey, eight and Klim, four. Behind them, in a white Dodge, were Oleg, his wife, Halyna, who would drive the whole way as her husband did not have a licence, and Tetiana Kovalenko, 50, mother of the wife of their son, Roman, 33. The two families were nervous but determined. They were destined never to even reach the outskirts of town. After turning on to Chkalova Street, just 800 metres from their doorstep, a Russian armoured vehicle, unseen by those in the second car, got the convoy in its sights, according to Halyna’s account to the Observer from her hospital bed. “The Chykmariovs’ car suddenly stopped and so I stopped,” said Halyna. “I saw a door open in the front car and two legs drop out. A thought came to my head, I just thought everybody is killed. It happened so quickly, I don’t know. My husband screamed, ‘turn round, turn round’. Then I felt something hit my right shoulder, a bullet. I pushed my husband to get out of the car. But he wasn’t moving. I realised he was dead. I just opened my door and ran.” Tetiana, in the back seat, couldn’t get out and had to smash her window open with her feet to escape. In the front car, which a short while later was consumed by flames, only Oleksandr survived the attack. His wife and two boys had been killed instantly by the machine-gun fire that raked the vehicle. Oleksandr crawled out of his shattered vehicle taking cover behind Halyna’s car. He reached into the front seat of the Dodge after spotting a mobile phone. “He called me,” said Roman. “He said, ‘Everyone’s dead. Your mother and father are dead.’” Oleksandr, who has since lost a leg, was later picked up by passing car. He was not ready to talk about the death of his family when approached by the Observer.\nRoman, who had been away on business when Vladimir Putin had begun his war on 24 February, says he will return to Bucha to find his father in a couple of days. Oleg’s body, locals say, stayed in the car for five days. The Russians would not allow it to be removed. “I don’t know where my father’s body is,” Roman said. “I have to find him.” His mother is still in hospital after being moved from a local facility to Chernobyl. “The doctors said that one centimetre lower and I would be dead too,” Halyna said. “I saw a V on the armoured vehicle,” she added, referring to the letter that, along with Z, has been painted on Russian vehicles operating in Ukraine. The understated manner in which Roman and his mother tell their dreadful story belies the strength of their determination that accounts of such crimes will be heard. “I hope this will be of interest to you,” Roman says. “It is a war crime.” The claims could not be independently verified although the Observer has seen a photograph of Halyna’s wounds and they echo a terrible list of similar stories that have emerged as the Russian troops have been driven back from Kyiv’s suburbs. On Saturday, the bodies of at least 20 men were found by Ukrainian forces lying in a single street in Bucha. One of them had his hands tied.\nSixteen of the 20 corpses were lying either on the pavement or by the verge, according to an account by AFP journalists who had been given access to the town by the military. Three were sprawled in the middle of the road and another was lying in the courtyard of a house, according to the account. An open Ukrainian passport lay on the ground next to the person who had his hands tied behind his back with a piece of white cloth. All were said to be wearing civilian clothes – winter coats, jackets or tracksuit tops, jeans or jogging bottoms, and trainers or boots. Two of them lay near bicycles while another was next to an abandoned car. Some were said to be laid face up, with their limbs unnaturally bent, while others were lying face down. The faces of the dead had taken on a pale waxy appearance, indicating that they may have been there for a number of days.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-02T18:13:10Z'}, {'id': '6245d66a8f081c355fe4301a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ninety-nine years and eight months old, Anna Bahatelya has survived every ordeal a tumultuous century of Ukrainian history has thrown at her. Born in August 1922, four months before the proclamation of the Soviet Union, Bahatelya lived through the Holodomor, when Joseph Stalin’s regime visited an artificial famine on large areas of Ukraine by confiscating its grain stocks. She survived the second world war, even after spending two years in a Nazi slave camp in Austria. She has outlived the Soviet Union and then made it through the difficult 1990s, when the Ukrainian economy left many in poverty. This January she survived a vicious bout of Covid, despite being unvaccinated. Now, four months short of her century, she faces yet another challenge: Vladimir Putin’s war on her country. “Now again, the people are suffering,” she said at her home on the outskirts of Kyiv, where she lives with her 69-year-old daughter, Olha Punyk. Speaking loudly, with an imploring tone and the cadence of poetry, Bahatelya gives sharp and clear recollections of the various ordeals she has been through, but grew angry when asked about the Russian president, making a rude hand gesture and calling him: “The worst man in the world.” Her hearing these days is not so good, but even she can hear the loud booms coming from Brovary, just a few miles from her home on the edge of the capital, which was pounded by Russian strikes in the first part of the war. Punyk taped over the windows in her mother’s room and has brought dark curtains for the windows, but said the renewed military action has brought back traumatic memories for her mother. Most people over 80 in Ukraine have lived through a lot. One historian has termed Ukraine and the wider region “the bloodlands” – the territories caught between the violence of Hitler and Stalin that saw terror, war and the Holocaust in the mid years of the 20th century. Sometimes, the most practical option has been to try to shield older people from the realities of the new war to prevent the traumas of the past returning. At one old people’s home in Kyiv, the director has spent the past weeks doing everything to shut out the fact that life outside is in any way different. “A lot of my people have absolutely no idea what is happening outside the fence,” said the director, who asked not to be named. Some elderly people are all too aware, however. Anatoliy Ruban, 84, lives alone on the far western outskirts of Kyiv, just a short distance from the Russian forward positions outside the city. There has been constant shelling nearby since the war started. “I hear everything: the explosions and the sirens. When it’s loud, I sit in the bathroom until it’s finished,” he said. Ruban was a child during the second world war in Kyiv, but he remembers it vividly, and the recent action has brought the memories flooding back. “I remember my mum put me on a cart and we rode out of the city, and I remember bullets flying around above my head,” he said. After the outbreak of this war, Ruban declined the suggestion that he should leave Kyiv for a safer place in western Ukraine or Europe, and indeed has still been going to work for the past month, working 24-hour shifts as a janitor at a youth sports hall. “I take it all calmly, I’ve seen war with my own eyes before. A person is forced to adapt to everything. I refuse to go anywhere, and nobody is waiting for me anyway,” he said.\nRuban served in the Soviet army in the late 1950s and used to count Russians among his friends, but said he was now disgusted with the neighbouring state and particularly its leader. “Putin is the scariest man in the world – I just hope that lunatic doesn’t press the nuclear button. That’s what I’m really scared of,” he said. Bahatelya is also aware of what is happening, though her daughter does her best to shield her from the worst of it. “I try to turn the television off when there’s news about the war – she just gets very upset and starts talking about the last war,” she said. In June 1943, after the Nazis occupied Bahatelya’s village, she was sent along with millions of other women to be an Ostarbeiter, the term the Nazis gave to civilians captured in occupied territories and forced into slave labour inside the Third Reich. She spent two years living in a camp in the small Austrian town of Ternitz and working in a factory there. “We had a quarter loaf of bread in the morning and a thin soup twice a day, then potatoes on Sunday,” she recalled. When the war was coming to a close, as Soviet soldiers moved westwards, Bahatelya went the other way, walking to Budapest before journeying home by train to find her whole village destroyed. Back then, she considered herself a patriotic Soviet citizen and the Russians to be a fraternal nation. Her daughter said: “She told me that when Stalin died, she cried. She cried sincere tears, because they thought it was a tragedy. They were zombified back then, just like the Russians are zombified by their propaganda today.” Asked what she would like for her 100th birthday, Bahatelya said she had one wish: “I’d like him to die,” she said. It was clear who she meant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-03T11:29:47Z'}]}