{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Britain called me a collaborator. Why?’ Ukrainian politician Yevhen Murayev hits out', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-13T08:30:18Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/13/britain-called-me-a-collaborator-why-ukrainian-politician-yevhen-murayev-hits-out', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/foreign-commonwealth-and-development-office'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Liz Truss', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Shaun Walker', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaun-walker'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/worldnews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '620925908f082cb98bbaa7b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has allocated $592m (£437m) to guarantee the continuation of flights to and from the country, as fears of flying over its airspace led some airlines to scrap or divert flights as tensions between the west and the Kremlin mount over a possible Russian invasion. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said the funds “were allocated to ensure flight safety in Ukraine for insurance and leasing companies” and would “stabilise the situation on the market of passenger air transportation and will guarantee the return to Ukraine of our citizens who are currently abroad”. The Dutch carrier KLM had earlier cancelled flights to Ukraine after the Netherlands government issued a travel warning over the risks of flying in the region, while Germany’s Lufthansa said it was considering suspending air traffic. A passenger plane operated by the Ukrainian charter airline SkyUp, which was on its way to Kyiv from Madeira in Portugal, was meanwhile diverted on Saturday to the Moldovan capital, Chișinău, after the plane’s Irish owner said it was banning flights in Ukrainian airspace. Ukraine’s state air traffic service on Sunday advised airlines to avoid flying over the open waters of the Black Sea until Saturday because of Russian naval exercises involving more than 30 Russian ships near the Crimea peninsula. But an adviser to the president’s chief of staff said there was “no point” in further closing the skies and speaking after KLM’s suspension said it “somewhat resembles a kind of partial blockade”. The Netherlands is especially sensitive to the potential dangers of Ukrainian airspace after a Malaysia Airlines flight, en route to Kuala Lumpur from Amsterdam, was shot down over an area in eastern Ukraine held by Russia-backed rebels in July 2014, killing all 298 people onboard, including 198 Dutch citizens. An investigation by the Dutch Safety Board found that the BUK surface-to-air missile that downed the plane had come from a Russian military base. KLM said in a statement that its decision followed “adjusted travel advice to code red and an extensive safety analysis”. “KLM has not been flying over the eastern regions of Ukraine and Crimea since 2014,” the company added. “There are now no more KLM flights through Ukrainian airspace until further notice.” A spokesperson for Lufthansa told Reuters on Sunday: “Lufthansa is monitoring the situation in Ukraine very closely.” Governments of 39 countries have warned their citizens to leave Ukraine as soon as possible, according to the Ukrainian news site Novoe Vremya. Many foreigners were rushing to book flights after rumours that Ukrainian airspace may soon be closed. “From tomorrow, airlines are advised not to fly … over this area, and to plan optimal routes in advance, taking into account the current situation,” Ukraine’s state air traffic service said. Mustafa Nayyem, Ukraine’s deputy infrastructure minister, said on Sunday the government had not closed the country’s airspace. “Closing the airspace is a sovereign right of Ukraine and the government has not taken this decision,” Nayyem wrote on Facebook.\nNayyem said the majority of airlines continued to operate but some were facing difficulties with insurers, given fears of a Russian attack. “We expect that in the nearest time the situation will stabilise, but nevertheless the state is ready to support airlines and plans to offer additional financial guarantees to support the air travel market,” wrote Nayyem. Kyiv’s Boryspil airport said it continued to operate normally on Sunday afternoon. “As of today, almost all flights are on schedule and without changes,” the airport said. “Stay calm, and watch for possible changes in the schedule.” Both KLM and Lufthansa began rescheduling flights in January to avoid airline crews having to stay in the Ukrainian capital overnight as the buildup of Russian troops at the Ukrainian border intensified. The Irish low-cost airline Ryanair said in late January that it had reduced flights to and from the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T19:50:02Z'}, {'id': '62093d268f0874f036fc30f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The rightwing French presidential candidate Valérie Pécresse vowed to crack down on immigration as she held her first big rally on Sunday amid competition from the growing far right and defections from her party to the centrist leader Emmanuel Macron. “There is no sovereignty without borders,” Pécresse said on stage in Paris as more than 6,000 people waved French flags in support of the first female presidential candidate for Les Républicains, the traditional rightwing party of Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy. Pécresse, who on a recent trip to Greek migrant camps said she was not against “barbed wire” to keep migrants out of Europe, told the rally that she would support the building of barriers and “even walls” on the edge of Europe if the countries on the frontline wanted it. It was a clear reference to her rival, the controversial, far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour, who this week suggested building a Donald Trump-style anti-immigration “wall” around the edges of the EU.\nA former budget minister under Sarkozy, Pécresse, 54, wants to be seen as the only feasible rival to Macron ahead of the April election. But she faces the serious challenge of whether she can make it to the second round runoff. The far right has risen in force to represent about 30% of the vote in current polls, and is split between two candidates, Marine Le Pen, running for the third time, and the newcomer Zemmour. Both are hovering around the same score as Pécresse in the polls. At the rally, Pécresse cited her heroes, Britain’s Margaret Thatcher and Germany’s Angela Merkel, as “women who always defended their people”, saying she wanted to create a “New France” of law and order, with tight controls on immigration and quotas for migrants. She said she would also oppose what she termed woke movements, which she said threatened to “demolish French identity”, tellling the rally that as leader of the Île-de-France region, which includes Paris and its surrounding area, she had banned “burkinis” or full-body swimsuits, from pools. To cheers from the hall, she said: “For me, the headscarf is not a piece of clothing like any other. It’s not a religious prescription. It’s a sign of the submission of a woman.” She criticised Macron’s government for refusing to ban the Muslim headscarf from competitive sports. Pécresse repeated her promise that “the salaries of French people will increase by 10% during my presidency”, and said she would decentralise France, attacking Macron for a top-down leadership style and high public spending, which she said had tipped France into dangerous debt. A fluent Russian-speaker, Pécresse delved into international affairs, saying that under Macron, France had been “humiliated” on the international scene, including over the Aukus defence agreement between Australia, the US and the UK. While Macron is at 24% in the first round, according to the latest Cevipof poll for Le Monde, Pécresse is at 15.5%, with Le Pen at 15% and Zemmour at 14.5%. Without naming Zemmour or Le Pen, Pécresse told the crowd: “The extremists are lying to you. Refuse the venom of their nostalgia. Don’t let anger and fear win.” Pécresse is under pressure from her party to pull ahead of her far-right rivals in the polls just as president Macron is expected to declare his re-election bid this month.\nBut she suffered a blow this week on immigration when Natacha Bouchart, the rightwing mayor of Calais, broke ranks and announced she would support Macron for the presidential race. Bouchart is an outspoken critic of the situation of migrants wanting to reach Britain from the northern French coast on small boats. Bouchart said Macron had “listened attentively” to the problems of Calais and increased government involvement. She said she was supporting Macron “in the general interest of Calais”. Pécresse has failed to dominate the political debate with her policy ideas, in part because she is seen as attempting to cover all ideological bases in a divided party. She is seen as hailing from the moderate, centrist wing of the right, which Macron himself has won over by appointing two rightwing prime ministers. But Pécresse is also veering very hard right to win over the increasingly anti-immigration line on French national identity in her own party. Pollsters say her messaging to voters is not always clear. Chloé Morin, a political analyst who interviewed Pécresse on her communication style for a new book, We Get The Politicians We Deserve, said the rightwing candidate had been accused of appearing too studious and lacking spontaneity on screen. But Pécresse has criticised those who “act” in front of the cameras. Morin added: “Today, part of Pécresse’s space is occupied by Emmanuel Macron, who has the advantage of being the president in office … he has stifled her ground on the economy. And on the other side, she’s facing serious competition from Éric Zemmour and Marine Le Pen, who have the advantage of being in a more populist register of one-upmanship and can make themselves more audible in a media world that values clashes and buzz. They are more audible than Pécresse, who has to be more measured.” Meanwhile, Le Pen and Zemmour continued their own vicious battle to win far-right voters, with another defection from Le Pen’s National Rally party. Stéphane Ravier, Le Pen’s only senator, jumped ship to Zemmour saying he was best able to “unite” the far right.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T19:27:58Z'}, {'id': '62090e038f0874f036fc2e2b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dozens of western diplomats in Kyiv were packing their bags and preparing to leave the city on Sunday evening, as many countries issued a clear warning to all citizens still inside Ukraine: get out now. Six months after western decision-makers were taken by surprise by the speed with which Kabul fell to the Taliban, politicians in many countries are taking extra precautions over a potential Russian assault that has not yet begun. Governments of 39 countries have warned against travel to Ukraine, according to a count by the Ukrainian news site Novoe Vremya. Many have also warned that if people do not leave now, they may find it impossible to escape later, amid rumours that Ukrainian airspace could be closed in the coming days. The US, which has briefed that a full-blown Russian assault on Ukraine could be imminent, has said it is evacuating all but a small group of diplomats from Ukraine, and has reiterated warnings to US citizens that they should leave as soon as possible. “It isn’t just time to leave Ukraine, it is past time to leave Ukraine,” a senior US administration official said on Saturday. Britain and Germany have also advised their citizens to leave the country immediately.\nOne of the most significant steps is the decision of Britain, Canada and the US to withdraw its staff from a monitoring mission in the eastern Ukraine conflict zone, run by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), at a time when western intelligence claims Russia may be preparing a “false flag” incident in the region. The US and Canadian embassies have sent non-essential staff and family members home and are evacuating others to the western Ukrainian city of Lviv. American, Canadian and British military trainers in the country have also been withdrawn. Office space and hotel rooms in Lviv are at a premium as diplomats and businesses temporarily relocate there. Britain’s ambassador, Melinda Simmons, will stay in Kyiv and work with a core team, while other British diplomats have been sent home. US citizens in Ukraine said they have received calls from the state department warning them to leave as soon as possible. “It wasn’t an order but it was very strong advice,” said Joseph Davis, a US citizen based in Odessa. He said he had decided to stay for now, as he believed the war scare was overhyped and he had family, friends and colleagues in the city. For a number of weeks, the messaging of western capitals, particularly Washington and London, has been sharply at odds with the tone taken by the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. This has led to mutual irritation, with many foreign officials feeling Zelenskiy, a former comedian, is out of his depth and refusing to take an evident threat seriously. Zelenskiy’s circle, meanwhile, say the constant warnings of imminent invasion coming from Washington are helping to sow panic in the country and are causing economic chaos. David Stulík, a former EU diplomat in Kyiv, said the evacuations could be part of “strategic messaging” to the Russians to show that the west is taking the situation seriously. But many Ukrainians expressed frustration with the withdrawals, saying that with the potential shutting down of airspace in the coming days, it felt like Ukraine, not Russia, was being sanctioned. “Western citizens are ordered to leave, but we don’t have anywhere to go. How should that be perceived by average Ukrainians?” said Daria Kaleniuk, the executive director of Ukraine’s Anti-Corruption Action Centre. She said western nations should move immediately to put a stop to the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline and impose personal sanctions on Kremlin-linked oligarchs, rather than reserve these measures for after a Russian attack. “If you have intelligence that is really strong enough to evacuate your citizens, then you have strong reasons to act tough on Russia right now,” said Kaleniuk. Some diplomats in Kyiv say the images of the chaotic withdrawal and evacuation efforts from Afghanistan last year are playing heavily on the minds of decision-makers in western capitals.\nIn Britain, the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, explicitly made the comparison. “Following the chaos of the evacuation from Afghanistan, we ask the government for reassurance that the right lessons have been learned,” he said. Others wonder whether the fall of Kabul to the Taliban is a helpful comparison for a country that has land borders with several EU member states in the west. “Russians, if they entered Ukraine or even Kyiv, would not be chasing local staff of western embassies, and all embassies would continue their work,” said Stulík. However, he said the evacuations were a sensible temporary precaution against the worst-case scenario. Russia’s foreign ministry has also said it will “optimise” staff at its embassy and three consulates in Ukraine. Spokesperson Maria Zakharova said this was due to “possible provocations from the Kyiv regime or third countries”. It was not immediately clear how severely the withdrawal of US, UK and Canadian monitors will affect the OSCE mission in eastern Ukraine. The mission had 680 international monitors, according to a January report, of whom 57 were from the US, 40 from the UK and 28 from Canada. Helga Maria Schmid, the OSCE secretary general, wrote on Twitter that the monitoring mission and other OSCE projects in Ukraine “will continue to fulfil their mandates without interruption”. It is unclear whether other countries will also pull their staff in coming days. “If I had been given a choice, I would have stayed, but there was definitely no choice about it,” said one American member of the mission, who was in the process of being evacuated for a minimum of 30 days, after which there would be a “security review”. “There is a bit of head-scratching here about why people are being pulled from an active conflict area for safety reasons, because of a potential conflict that hasn’t manifested yet,” said the US citizen.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T19:28:06Z'}, {'id': '620916668f08aed16736035e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain believes that Russia’s powerful FSB spy agency has been given the task of trying to engineer coups in Ukraine’s major cities in the immediate aftermath of any invasion launched by the Kremlin. The assessment is that an attack would see Russia strike first against military targets, then encircle the capital, Kyiv, and possibly other major cities, with FSB saboteurs then expected to try to install pro-Russian leaderships within. No specific evidence has been put forward to justify the two-step plan, but it is nevertheless considered by the UK to be a central invasion scenario, aimed at “regime change” in Ukraine, in which Russia would seek to avoid bloody and high-risk urban warfare after an attack on its neighbour.\nBritain and the US both believe Russia has now assembled a force capable of invading Ukraine after massing more than 135,000 troops around its borders. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said over the weekend he believed an attack was now “highly likely” and cut short a family holiday. Both western countries have made a string of intelligence-led warnings about Russia’s intentions towards Ukraine in recent weeks, including that the Kremlin is planning “false flag” operations as a pretext for invasion, and that a group of five mostly former Ukrainian politicians have been recruited to participate in a coup. Some have been received critically in Kyiv and elsewhere. Four of the five politicians are now based in Moscow, making their Russian ties a matter of public record, while the fifth, the former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev, said he was banned from Russia and there was “no public evidence” he was involved. Russia denies it has any plans to attack its southern neighbour and has called western warnings “hysteria”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has also sought to play down the likelihood of an invasion, saying on Saturday: “Right now, the people’s biggest enemy is panic.” There is also scepticism in Ukraine that it would be possible to install any pro-Russian leadership in Kyiv and its other major cities, even in the context of a military incursion, given the broad public hostility to Moscow in the country. But western sources fear that Vladimir Putin has not appreciated the depth of popular opinion in Ukraine. “A lot of over-optimistic assessments are being fed all the way to the top of the Kremlin,” one official said. A similar multi-step plan was highlighted by Germany’s Bild tabloid earlier this month, based, it said, on a foreign secret service source. The newspaper went on to say Russia would then seek to appoint a pro-Kremlin parliament and round up Ukrainian activists and opposition leaders. In response,the Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova said Bild had “crossed all possible lines of human, genuine morality and ethics”. Ukraine’s SBU intelligence agency and others have repeatedly exposed evidence of FSB interference in the country since the start of the war with Russia in 2014. Late last year, the SBU said it had discovered a plot to smuggle explosives into the country from Russian-occupied Crimea. Zelenskiy said at the end of November that a coup plot had been discovered, which officials added was being planned by an FSB officer and defectors of Ukraine’s interior ministry who had moved to Crimea. Responsibility for Ukraine within the FSB lies with its fifth service, responsible for intelligence operations in former Soviet states. Its leader is Sergei Beseda, who was placed on US, EU and UK sanctions lists in 2014. Beseda was wanted by Ukraine for questioning in the aftermath of the anti-Russian Maidan revolution in February 2014, believing he was part of a failed attempt to take control of violent efforts to suppress the popular protests. Moscow said he was present to help ensure the protection of the Russian embassy during a time of uncertainty.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T19:13:29Z'}, {'id': '6208e0438f0874f036fc2c05', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Olaf Scholz will use his trip to Moscow on Tuesday to press home the economic cost of a Russian invasion of Ukraine, German government sources have said in what some European leaders fear could be a last opportunity to defuse the “extremely dangerous” situation on the border between the two eastern countries. The German chancellor, who has faced criticism at home for cutting a low-key profile in the diplomatic effort around the military buildup on the Ukrainian border until now, first arrives in Kyiv on Monday as US intelligence over the weekend claimed that Russia had accelerated plans for an invasion and could move troops across the border as soon as Wednesday, before the end of the Winter Olympics on 20 February. Joe Biden spoke to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Sunday morning, after ordering a near-total evacuation of the US embassy in Kyiv. A White House statement said Biden made clear the US would “respond swiftly and decisively to any further Russian aggression” and the two leaders agreed on the need to continue pursuing diplomacy and deterrence. “We have seen over the course of the past 10 days, dramatic acceleration in the buildup of Russian forces and the disposition of those forces in such a way that they could launch a military action essentially at any time,” Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, told the CBS News programme Face the Nation. “But of course, it still awaits the go order. And so therefore, we cannot predict the precise date or time that they make any action.” During the call Zelenskiy invited Biden to visit Kyiv. Reflecting the West’s concerns, Dutch airline KLM has canceled flights to Ukraine until further notice, the company said. The Ukrainian charter airline SkyUp said Sunday its flight from Madeira, Portugal, to Kyiv was diverted to the Moldovan capital. And Ukraine’s air traffic safety agency Ukraerorukh issued a statement declaring the airspace over the Black Sea to be a “zone of potential danger” and recommended that planes avoid flying over the sea on 14 to 19 February. Russia denies it plans to invade Ukraine, but there were reports on Sunday of attack and troop-carrying helicopters, being moved close to the Ukrainian border. Moscow failed to reply to a formal request from Ukraine to clarify the purpose of its military manoeuvres in Belarus by the 48-hour deadline set by the Vienna document, an international agreement intended to provide transparency and reduce the risk of war. The Belarus government responded to a similar request for Baltic nations, but said that some of the Russian units on its territory were there to guard its southern border, suggesting they would not be leaving on 20 February, when the military exercises are supposed to end. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said the “next step” was requesting a meeting within the next 48 hours for “transparency” about Russia’s plans. A submarine armed with cruise missiles from Russia’s Baltic fleet also sailed through the Bosphorus towards the Black Sea. Meanwhile, Lithuania announced a delivery of Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Ukraine while the US embassy said a 17th planeload of US military hardware had arrived in Kyiv, including shoulder-fired grenades. German government circles on Sunday talked of a “very worrying overall picture” on the Ukrainian border but rejected the suggestion that Scholz’s trip represented a “last attempt” at averting a war.\nGerman government sources said Scholz would press home the “unity of the EU, the US and Great Britain” when it came to economic sanctions in response to an invasion. Biden has said a Russian invasion would spell the end of the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, something Scholz has been more reluctant to spell out. Russian diplomats have shown themselves unimpressed with threats of western sanctions, however. The Kremlin’s ambassador to Sweden told a Swedish newspaper his country “doesn’t give a shit” about economic repercussions. “Excuse my language, but we don’t give a shit about all their sanctions”, Viktor Tatarintsev told the Aftonbladet newspaper in an interview posted on its website on Saturday evening. “We have already had so many sanctions and in that sense they’ve had a positive effect on our economy and agriculture,” said the veteran diplomat. “We are more self-sufficient and have been able to increase our exports. We have no Italian or Swiss cheeses, but we’ve learned to make just as good Russian cheeses using Italian and Swiss recipes,” he said. “New sanctions are nothing positive but not as bad as the west makes it sound”, he added. Scholz’s options during his trip to Moscow are limited. The Russian president is demanding “security guarantees” from the west, which would effectively undermine the sovereignty of independent states in east-central Europe and the Baltics. German government sources said on Sunday Scholz would offer Putin a dialogue and seek to find out more what Russia’s grievances entailed. The broadsheet Die Welt said he could stress Ukraine joining Nato is not a realistic prospect in the near future, adding that a compromise whereby Russia would be assured that Ukraine would not join Nato “in the next 10 years” had been discussed in Scholz’s circles as a “thought experiment”, though not as a concrete plan. Ukraine has expressed an interest in joining since 2002 but it would require the unanimous approval of existing members, based on factors such as a functioning democracy and an absence of “unresolved external territorial disputes”.\nAny symbolic concession would however face criticism from the Ukrainian side, whose ambassador in Berlin on Sunday accused the German government of “hypocrisy” over sticking to its restrictive stance on exporting lethal weapons, while continuing to supply Russia with dual-use goods that can be used for arms production. As recently as 2020, Germany exported such goods worth €366m (£306m) to Russia. Germany’s vice-chancellor and economy minister said on Sunday that “we could be on the verge of a war in Europe”. “It is absolutely oppressive and threatening”, the Green politician Robert Habeck told broadcaster NTV. He said Scholz’s trip was an important sign: “We won’t leave Ukraine alone.” Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, told German tabloid Bild am Sonntag an invasion of Ukraine would be only the start of a campaign of Russian aggression that would also threaten states in the Baltics. “If Olaf Scholz and other leaders of state speak to Vladimir Putin now, they should make clear to him: our entire country will defend itself against an attack and it will have serious consequences”, said the former boxer Klitschko, who spent a large part of his professional career in Germany. During his trip to Kyiv, Scholz will talk to the Ukrainian president about ways in which Germany could help stabilise Ukraine’s economy after fears of an imminent war have taken a toll on the country’s currency. Such measures would provide more immediate help to the Ukrainian side than any arms exports, German government circles said on Sunday. Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK Vadym Prystaiko had earlier complained that the alarms being sounded by the West risked playing into Putin’s hands. “It’s not the best time for us to offend our partners in the world, reminding them of this act which actually not bought peace but the opposite, it bought war,” the diplomat told the BBC.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T01:08:53Z'}, {'id': '6207d7a18f0822338491a1da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The unprecedented Russian military encirclement of Ukraine has not only brought closer the prospect of a devastating war in that country, it has also raised the risks of triggering an unintended wider conflict. The US and Nato have been adamant that their troops will not enter Ukraine no matter what happens, and the Pentagon has pulled out the 160 national guard soldiers who were acting as military advisers.\nEven during the cold war, Washington and Russia made sure their forces did not clash, and Joe Biden has made clear he would seek to keep it that way. “That’s a world war when Americans and Russia start shooting at one another,” Biden said. However, the massing of Russian troops in Belarus and the deployment of a substantial Russian naval force in the Black Sea, matched on a smaller scale by Nato land, sea and air reinforcements on the alliance’s eastern flank, means there is far more military hardware in close proximity than is normal. And with proximity comes the increased danger of accidents and unintended consequences. “The risk of something going down like a mid-air collision, or a trigger-happy Russian or American, can really escalate things quickly,” said Danny Sjursen, a former army major and director of the Eisenhower Media Network. “You’re setting yourself up for accidents and miscalculation, and that’s when you can get out of control real quick, because there are domestic considerations both in Russia and in the United States. An American pilot dies – now what? I’m not saying that necessarily means we go to cataclysmic nuclear war but it escalates things.” The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, told CBS News on Sunday that the US had sought to be transparent about its troop deployments in eastern Europe in order “to avoid mistake, miscalculation or escalation and also to send a very clear message to Russia we will defend every inch of Nato territory”. There is a long history of close encounters over the Baltic and Black Seas. Earlier this month US jet fighters scrambled to intercept Russian warplanes operating close to Nato airspace while British and Norwegian planes took off to monitor Russian aircraft flying into the North Sea. While Russia has shut off large parts of the Black Sea to conduct its manoeuvres, Nato navies have stayed out of the immediate vicinity for now, while building up their presence in the Mediterranean. If they do decide to go through the Bosphorus in a show of strength, or to safeguard commercial shipping, the risk will rise again. Elisabeth Braw, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, said the danger was further heightened by Russia’s suspected use of “GPS spoofing”, interference with the navigational equipment of other vessels. On several occasions recently, civilian ships traveling in the Black Sea have encountered mysterious GPS troubles that showed the vessels being in a different part of the Black Sea or even on land. It was widely though the incidents were caused by Russia testing its technology. “It raises the risk for naval vessels that are in the Black Sea, which we should remember is not that big, and it’s crowded,” Braw said. “There’s enormous shipping activity in the Black Sea, and so all those crews face the risk of having no GPS.” The transfer of combat troops from Russia’s far east to Belarus has not only significantly increased the imminent threat to Ukraine, but also made eastern European Nato members increasingly nervous. “The closest training ranges in Belarus are 150 to 200km from Vilnius or Warsaw,” said Kristjan Mäe, the head of the Nato and EU department at Estonia’s ministry of defence. “This is a Russian force posture that hasn’t been there previously.” A refugee crisis at the Polish-Belarus border last year led to a close encounter between the troops facing each other, with Warsaw complaining that Belarus forces opened fire in the direction of their soldiers. “We have to remember that the people who are actually out on the frontline are very young men and women and they face enormous responsibility,” Braw said. “Yes there is a chain of command but if there is some sort of provocation or aggression, intentional or unintentional, that is directed against them, then they have to respond.” The close encounters so far have occurred in peacetime. In the event of war, nerves will be far more on edge, communications could be hampered or flooded with disinformation. “We cannot be entirely confident that in the lead-up to or during a conflict that Nato and Russia will be able to communicate, especially as current civil and military communication systems between them are not as robust or technically resilient as they should be,” Sahil Shah, a policy fellow at the European Leadership Network, said. “The world’s two largest nuclear-armed states have returned to the brink of conflict exactly 60 years after the Cuban missile crisis. If diplomacy is not pursued to the fullest extent, the risks of miscalculation and miscommunication could potentially pull in wider Europe into a devastating war. Without dialogue on how to manage de-escalation, it will be as if our leaders are running into a monsoon with newspapers over their heads.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T16:19:13Z'}, {'id': '6202661a8f081628ce71a203', 'bodyTextSummary': 'David Lammy has written to the government asking it to pardon 70 abolitionists convicted for their role in the historic 1823 Demerara rebellion by enslaved people against British colonialists in the Caribbean. The shadow foreign secretary described the revolt, involving 10,000 enslaved people, as a “seminal moment” in the history of slave resistance. Although unsuccessful at the time, the event contributed to the abolition of slavery 10 years later, in 1833. Lammy said exercising the royal prerogative of mercy to grant pardons to those involved in the uprising, which was brutally crushed by the colonial militia in part of present-day Guyana, would be “a significant step in Britain’s acknowledgment of its role in the history of slavery”. The letter names 73 people who were tried, 70 of whom were found guilty, including 21 who were executed, including 10 who were decapitated after being hanged and had their heads put on poles. Hundreds of others were killed during and in the immediate aftermath of the uprising.\nLammy highlights two particular cases, that of Jack Gladstone, a slave who was the principal organiser of the uprising, and John Smith, a young British Protestant minister, both of whom were sentenced to death before having their sentences commuted. Gladstone, who was “owned” by John Gladstone, the father of the future prime minister William Gladstone, was not violent, according to testimonies – and also intervened to prevent other acts of violence. After his death sentence was commuted he was transported to St Lucia for hard labour. Smith had his sentence commuted by King George IV but died in prison in 1824 before the decision was communicated to Demerara. A two-day debate on whether to pardon him posthumously took place in parliament in June of that year, but the motion was defeated. In the letter, addressed to the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, Lammy wrote: “In recent years, this country has entered into a discussion about its colonial history and the path to repair. The full pardoning of both John Smith and Jack Gladstone would be a significant step in Britain’s acknowledgment of its role in the history of slavery. Both John Smith and Jack Gladstone were pioneers of the abolition movement, and they must be remembered and celebrated as such. It is for this reason that I am requesting a pardon through the exercise of the royal prerogative of mercy.”\nDemerara was one of Britain’s most lucrative colonies, being rich in sugar plantations at a time when the British economy was heavily dependent on the crop. It was known for the harsh treatment of enslaved people, designed to discourage them from rebelling against the white colonialists they heavily outnumbered. Lammy, who has spoken previously about the legacy of slavery and its impact on black Britons, based the letter on research into the Demerara uprising contained in the book White Debt. In a reply from Raab sent to Lammy on Wednesday, the justice secretary said that following Guyana gaining independence in 1966 and the country becoming a republic in 1970, it would be for the president of Guyana to grant such pardons. Thomas Harding, the author of White Debt, described Raab’s response as “shocking”. He said: “Britain was responsible for this gross miscarriage of justice, not Guyana, and the British government should be the one to pardon those found guilty. The men and women who took part in the Demerara uprising of 1823 were attempting to abolish British slavery. It was a British court martial which found the 70 people guilty, a court established by a British governor in a British colony (later known as ‘British Guiana’), on behalf of the British king, under British military code. “Now is the time for the British government to take full responsibly for its legacy of slavery, to pardon the ‘Demerara 70’ and recognise them for what they were: heroes, for all of us.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T13:53:59Z'}, {'id': '6208c05d8f0822338491aaf2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Under a glaring sky, Mauritian survey teams set off in two tender boats to measure Blenheim Reef. A line of breakers marked the outer line of the atoll. An inflatable, carrying two Swedish marine experts retained by the Mauritian government, found an entrance through submerged rocks and surf into calmer water inside. In the shallows, the two Swedes placed tide gauges on the sea floor to measure the water height – crucial evidence for a forthcoming case at the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. The survey and the tribunal case are proof that Mauritius is intent on asserting its rights to the Chagos Archipelago, as confirmed by successive international law rulings and a UN general assembly vote. The Foreign Office, outflanked by legal judgments, has so far avoided confrontation with Mauritius, claiming in its statements that it is cooperating with environmental research. The UK government still maintains that it holds sovereignty over British Indian Ocean Territory (Biot).\nThe purpose of the Mauritian survey is to establish whether any part of the reef remains above water even at high tide. If it does, the UN convention on the law of the sea will allow the country to extend its baseline in calculating its 200-mile exclusive economic zone. It would take only a small rock or shingle beach staying above water all the time for the baseline to be extended. The dispute over marine boundaries is with neighbouring Maldives. The international tribunal has already ruled that the UK has no legitimate claims in the area. The second Mauritian survey team set off in an open motor boat, scanning the outer reef for signs of boulders or sand bars appearing above the ocean swell. At one point, one small protruding rock was visible in the troughs between waves. A barely submerged rock platform, perhaps a metre below the surface, was visible further along the reef. The outer survey team motored around the perimeter, a distance of at least 10 nautical miles until, at one point, the mother ship was a distant smudge on the horizon. Dolphins raced along beside the bows of the boat, leaping playfully out of the water. Flying fish erupted from the seas, remaining airborne for remarkably long periods. Back on the Bleu De Nîmes, the cruise ship chartered by the Mauritian government, Zola Oskarsson, the Swede leading the survey, said it would take time for tide calculations to be completed. “When we come back to pick up the tide gauges we will be able to work out the reef levels,” he said. “It would have been more fun if we had seen some bird shit, but we didn’t. If you see guano, that’s a sign that a rock is permanently above water.” He added: “There was a spot where I could stand on the sandy bottom with my head above the water. When you are measuring a reef, living coral doesn’t count: it would be like using the top of a tree to record a mountain height. But dead coral is OK. That counts.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T11:41:01Z'}, {'id': '6207de698f08424c7f92b29d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oksana Riwnyj remembers life under Soviet rule. “When I was at university, I wasn’t allowed to speak up and say what I think. We couldn’t go to church or celebrate Christmas. It was very tough, especially for the young people,” the 58-year-old primary school teacher said. Now, the news of Russia assembling troops on the Ukrainian border triggers memories that bring her to tears. “I never thought something like this could happen. It’s too horrible to even think about,” she said. Riwnyj is one of about 70,000 Ukrainians living in the UK who are watching anxiously to see what will unfold over the coming days. The mother-of-two lived for the first two decades of her life in western Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union, which was toppled in 1991. She moved to the UK after meeting her husband, Stefan, a gas engineer, 25 years ago, and has a happy life in London, where – as a teacher at St Mary’s Ukrainian Saturday school – she is at the heart of the expatriate community. But while safe on UK soil, as the crisis in her home country intensifies, she is struggling to carry on with life as normal. “I’m trying to go about daily life but it’s a very stressful and worrying situation,” Riwnyj said. “I can’t sleep because all my family are over there.” For Diana Palamarchuk, 17, who grew up in Ternopil Oblast in western Ukraine but moved to the UK six years ago, watching the crisis play out on screen is difficult to take in. “It doesn’t really feel real because I haven’t been there and seen it with my own eyes. When you’re watching it on TV, it feels like you’re watching a film,” the A-level student said. While teachers at her school ask her how she is, most of the other pupils have no idea what’s going on in Ukraine. “Some of my friends know about it but not many,” she said. “The only thing people know about Ukraine is Chernobyl, and lots of people think Ukraine is poor, with dumb people. But it isn’t. It’s a beautiful country and Ukrainians are good people.” She said seeing what was happening was “really tough” because she still has family there. But she has been heartened by statements from British and US politicians warning Vladimir Putin of the potential consequences of any aggression. “Hopefully, it will make Russia think twice about it,” she said.\nIryna Pereginyak, 41, a learning support assistant, is also trying to remain positive. But her brother, 34, remains in Ukraine – and faces being called to fight if there is a war. “I am a very hopeful person but we are living in fear and anticipation of the worst,” she said. “Sometimes I have to just switch off and escape and watch a film, but there is no feeling of complete peace. It’s constant.” Vlodko Pawluk, an administrator from Barnet, London, and chair of the London branch of the Association of Ukrainians in Great Britain, is coordinating efforts to raise money that could be used to pay for supplies for those affected if the worst does happen, including soldiers serving on the frontline and people displaced by conflict. He said he was grateful for support from the UK and the US, but that many Ukrainians felt a little “bitter”. “Everybody knows this has been going on for a while, since the annexation of Crimea. But it feels like for eight years, the west has done nothing,” he said. “These sorts of conflicts belong to the last century, not in Europe in 2022. This could be a full-scale, bloody war.” Natalia Ravlyuk, 41, a retail manager originally from Ivano-Frankivsk in western Ukraine, described the situation as “very scary”. “I don’t know what to say to my relatives. I’m chaotically thinking, ‘What can we do here?’ We are demonstrating every week near the Russian embassy and at Downing St. “I personally feel guilty being here because they are unsafe there and I’m safe here,” she said. Watching events unfold from 1,400 miles away, she feels “helpless”. “I just want to do something and everything will be back to normal,” she said. “But what can we do?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T21:32:30Z'}, {'id': '6207e5758f089305555d7839', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sitting in a blue armchair, vaping with one hand and making phone calls with the other, Yevhen Murayev, Ukrainian politician and backer of the Nash television station, spent last week desperately trying to save his career. In recent weeks, his swanky television studios, housed in an industrial building not far from central Kyiv, have been picketed by groups of angry nationalists, and on Friday Ukraine’s security council imposed sanctions on the channel, effectively taking it off the air with immediate effect. He is not able to appeal against the decision. The reason, Murayev believes, is Britain. An unusual statement released by the Foreign Office three weeks ago referenced unspecified intelligence purporting to show Russia was plotting a coup in Ukraine to install a puppet government in Kyiv. “The former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev is being considered as a potential candidate,” read the statement, released in time to make the front of the Sunday newspapers. “It’s clear with the release of this statement that Britain decided it was going to be part of an information operation,” said Mark Galeotti, a Russia-focused political analyst. British and US officials say that by releasing statements such as this one, they are letting Russia know they are aware of Moscow’s plans and making it harder for the Russians to implement them. The Murayev announcement, however, was greeted with confusion and chuckles in Kyiv, given his low popularity ratings in most parts of the country. “It just didn’t sound right at all. This is not a government that could be imposed in Kyiv,” said a diplomatic source, adding that it would only make sense if Russia intended to divide the country and set up a regional government in the east. Murayev said he was on holiday with his family on a tropical island when he began receiving calls from British journalists who wanted his comment about allegations he was the figurehead of a Russian coup. “At first I thought it was some kind of prank,” he said. The Foreign Office statement named Murayev, as well as four other politicians who fled Ukraine after the 2014 Maidan revolution, including former prime minister Mykola Azarov, who has lived in Moscow ever since. Murayev said he had helped Azarov to escape from Ukraine in the heat of the revolution, driving him across the border to Russia, but since then has had no meaningful contact with him or the other men named.\n“Since then we have just spoken occasionally by phone, usually to wish each other happy birthday,” Murayev said. He claimed he has not visited Russia since 2015 and has been under Russian sanctions since 2018 after falling out with Viktor Medvedchuk, another pro-Kremlin politician, who is a personal friend of Vladimir Putin. “The British have publicly labelled me a collaborator, and now the Ukrainians are targeting me and there’s no public evidence,” he said. Like with so much of the recent publicised intelligence, it is certainly plausible someone in Moscow may have tapped up Murayev, one of the few politicians in Ukraine who is friendly to the Russian position. But it is hard to know whether the statement was based on rock-solid information or informal contingency plans. For Murayev, the biggest irritation was that he was named as someone who was “being considered”, but was not directly accused of anything. “How can I defend myself against the allegation when nobody has provided any evidence against me? I can’t even sue the British, because they phrased it very carefully. They haven’t directly accused me of being involved, just that some people may have been thinking of using me,” he said. The crescendo of intelligence briefings declaring that a Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent has mostly emanated from Washington in recent weeks, but Britain has emerged as the leading supporting voice, backing up US claims about the present danger. The Foreign Office has stood firmly behind US messages that the threat of a full-scale invasion is real and may come at any time, even as other European capitals and the Ukrainian government have remained more sceptical. This has been combined with a number of high-profile visits to Ukraine and Russia this month, starting with Boris Johnson’s visit to Kyiv to meet with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and followed last week with two ministerial visits to Moscow. The first of them – foreign secretary Liz Truss’s trip on Thursday – did not go well. One politically connected source in Kyiv compared the spectacle of Truss going up against Russia’s wily and experienced foreign minister Sergei Lavrov to “Champions League meets Sunday league”.\nA bad-tempered meeting ended with an acrimonious press conference and the Russian side commenting on a gaffe Truss had made during talks. Reportedly, as Truss noted the ominous Russian military buildup close to the Ukrainian border, Lavrov asked her whether Britain recognised Moscow’s sovereignty over the Rostov and Voronezh regions, where much of the buildup is taking place. Truss allegedly told Lavrov that Britain would “never” do so, before the British ambassador intervened to gently mention to Truss that these regions were in fact inside Russia. Before long, news of the geographical slip-up was being gleefully reported across Russian and international media. Truss seemed to confirm the reports when she said in an interview with a Russian newspaper that she had thought Lavrov was talking about regions of Ukraine. Truss returned to London with little sign she had made any progress either on divining Russia’s intentions or on delivering a useful message to Moscow. “I honestly have no idea why she went to Russia, except for the photo op,” said Galeotti. On Friday, the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, met his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu, a key member of Putin’s inner circle who rarely meets western ministers. Wallace described the talks as “frank and constructive”, and the visit lacked the adversarial jockeying of the Truss trip. In addition to the visits to Kyiv and Moscow, Britain has been more forthright providing weapons to the Ukrainian army than many European countries, and there has been gratitude in Kyiv for Britain’s forceful stance. But the intelligence briefings have not been as well received. “The majority of people in Ukraine took the British statement with enormous scepticism,” said Volodymyr Fesenko, a Kyiv-based political analyst. He suggested a popular theory was that the information may have been leaked to the British by personal enemies of Murayev. “I think the British may have been played,” Fesenko said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T21:24:51Z'}]}