{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Bolsonaro’s to blame’: Indigenous rights champion on crisis in Brazil', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-30T09:00:21Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/30/sydney-possuelo-brazil-indigenous-people-interview-bolsonaro', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Brazil', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jair Bolsonaro', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/jair-bolsonaro'}, {'tagTitle': 'Indigenous peoples', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/indigenous-peoples'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Interviews', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/interview'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Tom Phillips', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomphillips'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '630df6568f087b6858317fae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former residents of a hostel in Rwanda who were forced to leave under a controversial deal to house asylum seekers flown from the UK say they have been left homeless and destitute while the property remains unused. The men, all of whom are survivors of the Rwandan genocide, had lived in Hope Hostel in Kigali for up to eight years. But they were told to vacate two days after Priti Patel, the British home secretary, signed a £120m agreement to send refugees arriving in the UK by small boats to the east African country. Some former residents of the hotel were still students who say they lost their families in the genocide and have nowhere to go. The UK government has so far failed to send a single asylum seeker to Rwanda. One former resident of eight years said: “We don’t know what to do. In public, government officials say they are going to help us but no extra help has come. We are very worried but we are suffering. “It pains me to see that [the hostel] is still empty when we are homeless, on the street.”\nHe told the Guardian the government gave him money, which lasted a month after he was asked to leave the hotel, but has not received any additional funds for the last three months. He says he has limited work and has since slept at friends’ homes. “I was one year old when the genocide happened and all our relatives died. I came to this hostel as a gesture of kindness to give me some hope. Now, I have nowhere to go,” he said. A second former resident said he had since dropped out of education because he had no money for rent or food. “We face a lot of challenges that include hunger and lack of accommodation. Many families became fragile after the Covid-19 pandemic, so it’s hard to ask friends to accommodate any of us. The government says we are already grown-up people and we should find solutions but how can you find solutions when you don’t have a job?” he asked. “If this issue is solved, we can thank God. We need help but we are also risking our survival by telling the truth.” The residents asked not to be named for fear of reprisals. The Rwandan government has been criticised by Amnesty International for suppressing freedom of expression. Hope Hostel, in Kigali’s Kagugu neighbourhood, was built by Rwandan donors to accommodate up to 190 survivors of the 1994 genocide when hundreds of thousands of people, mostly from the Tutsi minority, were murdered during three months of mass killings. Formerly known as the Association of Student Survivors of Genocide (AERG) hostel, residents said there were about 40 people, mostly men, living there when Patel signed the deal. Boris Johnson promised that tens of thousands of asylum seekers who have crossed the Channel and arrived in the UK by irregular means would be sent to Rwanda, but so far, none have been sent following legal challenges. The first judicial review of the policy, brought by asylum seekers, two charities and a union representing Border Force staff, will begin in September. Patel toured the hostel in April but survivors of genocide who lived there were dispatched on a day trip to prevent them disrupting her visit.\nHer visit was carefully managed by both the Rwandan authorities and the Home Office to present the plan in the best possible light. The deal between Rwanda and UK, which was signed in April, has been widely condemned as inhuman, illegal, unworkable and prohibitively expensive. The UK government said it had paid an initial £120m to the Rwandan government for implementing the plan, but will have to pay additional costs for housing, food and travel. Yolande Makolo, a Rwandan government spokesperson, said the level of occupancy at the hostel had been dropping before the deal with the UK government was signed and that government funds continued to be offered to genocide survivors including those who lived at Hope Hostel. “Former residents of Hope Hostel who are not yet self-sufficient continue to be supported with rent and living allowances, as well as capital to start small businesses, both by the association, as well as through the Fund for Genocide Survivors.” Audace Mudahemuka, the president of AERG, said the hostel’s use by genocide victims was already in the process of being wound down before the government leased it for the UK deal. “Only a small fraction of the beds in the hostel were being used, and the facility was expensive to maintain. We were delighted when the government offered to rent the property as the funds we receive from this contract allows us to provide support to thousands of genocide survivors,” he said. The Home Office was approached for a comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T14:50:15Z'}, {'id': '5ec7b1508f0886ce4f5d86a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least 12 million people have fled their homes since Russia invaded Ukraine in February, according to the United Nations. More than five million – mainly women and children – have left for neighbouring countries, while seven million have been internally displaced. Many women have been apart from their husbands, sons and other family members for months. We are interested in speaking to Ukrainians who have been forced to leave their home country and have been separated from their partners and families. How are you adapting to the country you have moved to? How are you coping with being apart from your loved ones in Ukraine? Share your experiences We will only use the data you provide us for the purpose of the feature. We will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy. If you are 18 years or over, you can get in touch by filling in the form below or contacting us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T12:37:06Z'}, {'id': '630dd3128f080ba02dce9d0c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities in the eastern Spanish region of Valencia are calling on festival goers not to “lose respect for bulls” after seven people were killed by the animals during this year’s Bous al Carrer bull-running fiestas. The summer festivities – which translate as “bulls on the street”, and which are held in towns and villages across Valencia – have also resulted in more than 300 injuries in the past two months. The death toll now equals that of 2015, when the high number of fatalities prompted the Valencian government to toughen the legislation governing the fiestas. Current rules forbid people under 16 to participate, as well as those who are physically or psychologically unfit, or drunk or on drugs. An emergency meeting of the Bous al Carrer advisory committee was held on Monday to “review the current situation of the festivities and to listen to those involved in order to come up with preventive campaigns and more training for clubs and organisers”. José María Ángel, Valencia’s secretary for safety and emergencies, said: “We can’t lose respect for the bulls because the bulls kill and these festivals carry a high risk.” The fiestas, he added, were not like going to an outdoor dance or a concert in the village square – “they bring with them an individual and collective risk, and so participation requires maturity”. Ángel said the existing rules – which are frequently reviewed and updated to make them “some of the most exhaustive and restrictive in all of Spain” – needed to be followed. “It’s very important that whenever a situation that could constitute a breach is detected, immediate measures are taken and the director of festivities or a bull expert is informed,” he said. “If an event has to be stopped or suspended because that’s what the circumstances demand, then that’s what will happen until things get back to normal.” At the beginning of July, the mayor of the Valencian town of Puçol – where a 12-year-old boy was gored this year – warned of the high Bous de Carrer accident rate in the area and called on festivalgoers to behave prudently. “We ask those taking part in the Bous de Carrer to act responsibly,” said Paz Carceller. “If you’re going into a bull enclosure, do it without drink or drugs for everyone’s sake.” The Spanish animal rights party Pacma said that nothing short of a total ban on bull festivals would end the suffering of humans and animals. “Any measure taken that isn’t the prohibition of all bull festivals will be useless,” it said in a statement. “These events are based on extreme cruelty and violence and, as such, are an authentic torture for animals and a huge danger to all people. This is about archaic traditions that foment violence and poison society.” Six people were gored – none of them fatally – and more than 80 others injured at Pamplona’s famous annual bull-running festival last month.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T12:27:33Z'}, {'id': '630ddda98f08fa7e6340c0f5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iraqi militias are clashing in the capital and elsewhere across the country as tensions flare up relating to neighbouring Iran’s influence in the Middle Eastern state. At least 30 people have been killed and hundreds wounded. What is happening in Baghdad and other Iraqi cities? After facing off for months, Shia Muslim groups are fighting one another across the country. The battles are centred mainly in Baghdad’s green zone – which once housed US forces – but have extended to towns and cities in the south. The spark for the unrest was the resignation in frustration from political life of the influential Shia cleric Moqtada al-Sadr. What was the political backdrop to the unrest? Sadr’s political bloc performed strongly in elections 10 months ago, while rival Iran-backed Shia blocs performed poorly. But a standoff since has failed to produce a coalition that could form a government in the 329-seat parliament. Government formation is usually laborious in Iraq, but this time there is little will to compromise. Who is Moqtada al-Sadr? Sadr has been one of the most prominent figures in Iraq since the US invasion to oust Saddam Hussein. Now 48, the cleric has gained a huge following among the Shia working poor and some of the middle classes, and has had a hot-cold relationship with Tehran. Once a hardline protagonist in Iraq’s civil war, he now claims nationalist credentials, confronting Iranian influence in Iraq and calling for the country’s Sunnis to be re-enfranchised and for all foreign forces, including Iran, to leave the country. Widely known to be volatile and unpredictable, he has proven a difficult figure to gauge or deal with. Why did he say he was resigning from politics? Sadr said he is leaving politics and closing all Sadrist institutions after failed efforts to form a government. He is no stranger to quitting, having done so seven times before in various acts of political posturing. However, this time he has put all he has on the line, vowing to break a system that he says has failed the country. Why did he quit now? Sadr’s withdrawal came after the resignation of his spiritual mentor, Ayatollah Kadhim al-Haeri, who in a surprise statement urged him to follow Iran. The highly unusual statement was damaging to Sadr and widely thought to have been directed by Iran.\nWhat is Iran’s role in Iraqi politics? Iran and Iraq are majority Shia countries and since 2003, Iran has had a growing presence in the country. It heavily backed Shia groups, including the Sadrists, during the civil war, while building its own proxies, such as Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq and Kata’ib Hezbollah, as powerful militias that operate outside state structures. At the same time, it has established a foothold in the Iraqi parliament and in various arms of government. Iran sees Iraq as a vital arena for its regional power projection. What might happen next? In taking on Sadr like this, Iran has potentially opened a battle that it cannot win. Sadr can command the loyalty of close to 7 million Shias across the country, and has access to large stashes of weapons. How far this confrontation will lead will be determined by how staunch Sadr is in his attempts to break the system. He has earned a reputation as a capricious figure whose convictions can readily fade.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T14:15:34Z'}, {'id': '62e3c1848f08730a1f7f3939', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mountain lions, alligators and zebras are just a few of the nearly 2,500 “dangerous wild animals” being kept by private collectors in England, according to a survey of council licensing data. The list includes Bactrian camels in Sedgemoor, grey wolves in West Berkshire, honey badgers in Cornwall and deadly snakes in Bolsover. The survey found the Buckinghamshire council area leads the country, with 325 dangerous wild animals registered, including blackbuck antelope, capuchin monkeys, lemurs and ostriches. West Oxfordshire district council, with 200 exotic animals licensed, came second – with the large total including animals at Heythrop Zoological Gardens, an unlicensed zoo run by ex-circus trainer Jim Clubb, who hires out animals including trained hippos, tigers and zebras for TV shows, films and private parties. Cornwall came in third place, with 165 dangerous wild animals registered – many of which belong to the collector and conservationist Todd Dalton, who runs the Feral-Wild Animal Project, a menagerie including two sun bears and a large variety of big cats. There are 14 different species of exotic feline owned privately in Cornwall, including a cheetah, a mountain lion and a snow leopard. Cornwall has for decades been dogged by rumours of big cats on the loose, with reports concentrated around the north-eastern area of Bodmin Moor. Sceptics have scoffed at stories about the “Beast of Bodmin”, saying the climate and limited food supply would make sustaining a breeding population on the moors impossible. But a privately maintained population of big cats could provide a plausible explanation for such sightings. Police around the country received 32 calls about big cat sightings in 2021, and last year, Devon and Cornwall police recorded a sighting of a lynx in Helston. England also has numerous bison farms, where the animals are farmed for meat, with 105 of the North American beasts roaming the plains of Melton Mowbray in Leicestershire, 47 at Bush Farm in Warminster, Wiltshire, and another 40 at a ranch in Durham. Alligators are registered to owners in South Gloucestershire, Hampshire, Hertfordshire, Lincolnshire, North Yorkshire and West Oxfordshire.\nOne of the world’s most dangerous arachnids, the brown recluse spider, resides in Dacorum, north-west Hertfordshire, with the 2.5cm-long spider capable of dispensing necrotic bites which can destroy blood vessels, tissue and nerves. Six king cobras – hooded vipers native to South Asian jungles and capable of killing an elephant with a single bite – are registered to owners in Bolsover, Dacorum, Dover, Hertsmere, Stroud and West Northamptonshire. Various species of venom-spraying snakes, which can poison people from a distance of up to 3 metres, are also slithering around UK vivariums – including the Mozambique spitting cobra, which is registered to owners in Dover and Thanet and must be handled with goggles to avoid its flying cocktail of toxins causing blindness. Also famous for spitting, camels are another commonly kept pet, with the survey finding six council areas – Melton, North Hertfordshire, North Northamptonshire, Sedgemoor, Staffordshire Moorlands and West Oxfordshire – are home to the two-humped species native to the steppes of central Asia. The survey of licensing data was based on March 2022 figures provided by local authorities. Chris Lewis, of Born Free Foundation, said: “I think most people would be shocked to learn that in this day and age so many dangerous wild animals, including big cats, alligators and venomous snakes are being kept by private individuals across the UK. “Legislation governing the keeping of dangerous wild animals is now almost 50 years old, inconsistent with other animal legislation and fails to ensure the welfare of animals kept under licence. “The intention of the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 was to make the private keeping of dangerous wild animals a wholly exceptional circumstance; however, the ongoing trend highlights quite the opposite. Far greater and up-to-date restrictions on the trade in and keeping of wild animals as pets in the UK are needed. “Any future legislation should provide full consideration of whether the welfare needs of individual animals can be met, and owners have necessary qualifications and experience; a guarantee that the trade does not compromise conservation of species in the wild; due consideration of potential environmental concerns (such as the establishment of invasive species through escapes, the deliberate releases of unwanted pets, and the possible spread of zoonotic diseases); and confirmation there is no risk to wider health and safety of animals or people.” • This article was amended on 30 August and 7 September 2022. An earlier version mistakenly included hyenas among the privately owned exotic felines in Cornwall. Also, text was added to clarify that the council licensing data the report is based on was correct up to March 2022.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-07T09:09:52Z'}, {'id': '630d12098f0876e20fe16a6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Greece is to launch a parliamentary inquiry into a spy scandal embroiling the government as MEPs also step up calls for an investigation into the use of phone taps in the country. An inquiry proposed by the centre-left Pasok party was backed by the entire political opposition late on Monday after revelations that the group’s leader, Nikos Androulakis, had been placed under surveillance while serving as an MEP. “It is necessary more than ever for these cases to be investigated,” the Pasok MP Haris Kastanidis told the chamber, saying the inquiry should not be limited to Androulakis. Eavesdropping claims made by the communist KKE party as well as the bugging of journalists should also be addressed, he said. The centre-right government has faced charges of a cover-up by liberal and leftwing MEPs, who are pressing for a fact-finding mission to be sent to Greece. Lawmakers with the ruling New Democracy party abstained from Monday’s vote although they made clear that they, too, supported the inquiry in the name of reforming Greece’s intelligence service, the EYP. The wiretap disclosures have been described as “probably the tip of the iceberg” by Sophie in ‘t Veld, a Dutch politician heading the European parliament’s PEGA committee looking into the use of malicious spyware across the continent. “The Greek authorities, on the one hand, claim they are innocent so they’ve got nothing to hide, and on the other hand they are very reluctant to shed light on the whole matter,” she said. “And so far all their moves over the last year or so have been to cover things up.” The Androulakis affair is expected to be raised on Tuesday when the 38-member PEGA committee holds the first of two hearings this week on “spyware against citizens”. Earlier this year, it emerged that the phones of the financial journalist Thanasis Koukakis had been monitored with Predator spyware, manufactured by Cytrox, a surveillance start-up based in North Macedonia. The malware, which has the ability to read encrypted data and turn a mobile phone into a listening device, was also deployed against Androulakis but the attempted hack failed because the politician failed to activate the necessary clickbait. The software was discovered when the MEP, who was subsequently targeted by EYP, sent his mobile phone to the European parliament’s cybersecurity department for a routine check. The scandal threatens political turmoil in the run-up to elections next year amid calls from the former premier and main opposition head, Alexis Tsipras, for the prime minister to resign. Kyriakos Mitsotakis 54, who has vowed to see out his full four-year term, citing the need for stability at a time of global uncertainty and rising tensions with Turkey, has said he was unaware of the bugging operation. “I have looked the Greek people in the eye and I have assured them that I knew absolutely nothing. It is my word against yours,” he said, turning to Tsipras during a heated debate in Athens’ 300-seat parliament on Friday. From the outset, Mitsotakis has accepted the surveillance of his political opponent was wrong. In a surprise step, his office announced the resignations on 7 August of Greece’s spy chief, Panagiotis Kontoleon – going so far as to publicly chastise the intelligence service for “incorrect actions” – and Grigoris Dimitriadis, the leader’s nephew and powerful chief of staff. Mitsotakis has also suggested that the revelations are the result of “dark forces” bent on destabilising Greece. With rising energy costs and economic worries topping the agenda, officials insist the disclosures have done little to dent the administration’s popularity. A report issued by Google’s threat analysis group in May said the product was used by “government-backed actors” in several states, including Greece. Mitsotakis has rejected any suggestion of Predator being used by the Greek authorities, although the software is known to be packaged by Intellexa, a firm based in Athens and registered in Cyprus. In one of his first moves after winning power in July 2019, Mitsotakis placed EYP under the aegis of the prime minister’s office and not the interior ministry, as had previously been the case. The direct line of communication has also played a role in the criticism being levelled against the leader. Surveillance is by no means a new feature of the Greek state, where memories of such practices during the 1967-74 military dictatorship have yet to fade among the older generation. Under Tsipras, wiretapping also increased, with the then government taking the step of reducing the number of prosecutors required to approve permits. Addressing parliament on behalf of the ruling New Democracy (ND) party on Monday, the MP Dimitris Keridis said the inquiry should also include the period when Syriza was in power. The committee, which will sit in closed session, is dominated by ND MPs. The number of wiretaps placed on citizens for reasons of “national security” have allegedly soared since Mitsotakis assumed office. The independent telecoms watchdog, ADAE, has referred to 15,000 eavesdropping requests being made last year alone. “Other revelations are bound to follow,” said Stelios Koulouglou, a Syriza party MEP who also sits on the PEGA committee. “What has been happening in Greece reminds me of the tactics pursued by the Stasi in east Germany. Mitsotakis’s aim was complete control and under [his purview] surveillance was broadened and became extremely systematic.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T12:14:19Z'}, {'id': '5ec7b1508f0886ce4f5d86a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The majority of young people in the UK say they have prayed, with one-third praying in the last month, a survey by the Church of England has found. More than half (56%) of 18- to 34-year-olds reported having ever prayed, compared with 48% of all adults, the poll of 2,073 adults by Savanta ComRes found. We’d like to hear from young people in the UK – of all faiths and none – about their relationship with spirituality. Have you discovered it recently, or has it changed over time? We’d like to hear about how you become interested in it and why. Share your experiences We will only use the data you provide us for the purpose of the feature. We will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy. If you are 18 years or over, you can get in touch by filling in the form below or contacting us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T17:29:49Z'}, {'id': '62fb7fea8f08877c40646f59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jair Bolsonaro’s calculated sabotage of Indigenous and environmental protections has exposed Brazil’s Native peoples to the most dramatic crisis in their history, the country’s most famous living explorer has said. Speaking to the Guardian, Sydney Possuelo, the outspoken former president of Brazil’s Indigenous protection agency, Funai, voiced outrage and sorrow at the demolition of safeguards he helped create during his legendary six-decade career. Possuelo, who ran Funai in the early 1990s, said Brazil’s original inhabitants had for centuries been treated with incomprehension or outright hostility by their government and fellow citizens. “But right now, under Bolsonaro, everything has deteriorated,” the veteran Indigenous champion said, pointing to systematic enfeebling of Funai since Brazil’s far-right president took office in 2019. “Before, the invasion of Indigenous lands [and] extraction of wood happened to a lesser extent and there was a certain response from government agencies. Funai would fight against this, and the police would back them up. Now, in the Bolsonaro era, everything has become so dangerous because you have a pre-planned policy that stems from the presidency and spills out into every single other government institution,” Possuelo added, saying Bolsonaro had turned Funai into an “anti-Indigenous agency”. A report released this month said that under Bolsonaro there had been a 180% increase in illegal invasions of Indigenous lands by goldminers and loggers and accused the president of “normalizing” such violence. “Indigenous people have never faced a worst moment in Brazilian history than the one they are now facing, because we are talking about a deliberate policy that comes from the president himself who gives cover to criminals and trespassers,” Possuelo said. Criticism of Bolsonaro’s decision to slash Funai’s budget and fill the organization with officials who were inexperienced or unsympathetic to the Indigenous cause has intensified after the murders of the indigenista Bruno Pereira and British journalist Dom Phillips in June. Possuelo argued Bolsonaro bore responsibility for that crime in the Amazon’s Javari Valley, having relentlessly fomented hostility towards Indigenous people, activists and environmental defenders.\n“It is crystal clear to me: he’s to blame. Bolsonaro’s to blame because he’s the driving force behind this policy … and he has used the government structure to destroy the environment and the Indigenous. This has consequences,” said Possuelo, who led a historic 105-day expedition through the Javari in 2002. “He’s not the person committing the actual crime but he is the mentor of this anti-environmental and anti-Indigenous policy … The shamelessness with which you can just invade Indigenous lands, kill and kidnap, exists because these people know they enjoy the protection of the highest levels of government.” Possuelo suspected Bolsonaro’s dismantling of Indigenous protections was not just about benefiting powerful members of the agribusiness sector keen to cash in on Brazil’s rainforests. Rather, a deep-rooted hostility to Indigenous people was at play. The explorer recalled how in 1998, Bolsonaro claimed Brazilian troops had been “incompetent” in their handling of Indigenous communities. “The North American cavalry, yes, they showed competence when they wiped out their Indians in the past so that today they no longer have this problem in their country,” Bolsonaro declared. “It’s almost a declaration of war,” Possuelo said of those notorious remarks. “How has such rage managed to take root within the government?” he asked.\nThe octogenarian activist, who continues to roam Brazil even at 82, was speaking during a recent visit to the Amazon’s Araribóia Indigenous territory, where Guajajara tribe members gave him a hero’s welcome. “You’re part of our family,” one rainforest defender, Olímpio Iwyramu Guajajara, told Possuelo before honoring him with a song in the group’s language, Tenetehara.\nA group of Guajajara activists called the Forest Guardians told Possuelo of their struggle against illegal loggers. “We aren’t fighting to start a war. We’re fighting to put an end to all this killing,” said Zé Guajajara, a 32-year-old leader whose cousin was murdered in 2019.\nPossuelo said government neglect meant such self-defense groups were now an essential way for Indigenous communities to defend themselves. “They aren’t the ones who should be here risking their lives, the Brazilian government should be. But it isn’t here – and it behaves almost like their enemy by protecting the invaders. So this is exactly what they must do.” Responding to Possuelo’s criticisms, a Funai spokesperson said it was taking “effective and practical” steps to support Indigenous communities and had spent more than £13.2m on inspection operations designed to protect them. “Funai … has spared no effort in acting, alongside … environmental agencies and security forces, to strengthen activities designed to fight illegal activity in Indigenous areas and ensure the protection of Indigenous communities,” they claimed. Possuelo said he felt dispirited by the plight of Brazil’s Indigenous communities. “Sometimes I feel ashamed to say I’m a Brazilian.” But he voiced optimism that political change was coming, with polls suggesting Bolsonaro will lose October’s election to the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who has promised to create a ministry for Native peoples. “I just hope he [Bolsonaro] doesn’t try any silliness, claiming the elections were rigged or the electronic voting system doesn’t work and all that nonsense, like his mate Trump in the US,” Possuelo said, noting the criminal investigations the former US president now faced. “Beware, Bolsonaro. You might suffer the same fate,” Possuelo quipped, as darkness fell on the jungle camp where he was sleeping in a hammock surrounded by the people he has devoted his life to defend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-29T20:16:48Z'}, {'id': '630d618f8f08237696476a28', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Another Saudi Arabian woman has been sentenced to decades in prison by the kingdom’s terrorism court for using social media to “violate the public order”, according to court documents seen by a human rights group. Nourah bint Saeed al-Qahtani was sentenced to 45 years in prison after a specialised criminal court convicted her of “using the internet to tear [Saudi Arabia’s] social fabric”, according to documents that were obtained and reviewed by Democracy for the Arab World Now (Dawn), an organisation founded by Jamal Khashoggi. Dawn shared its findings, which it said were verified by Saudi sources, with the Guardian. Few details are known about Qahtani, including her age or the circumstances around her arrest and conviction. But the news of her decades-long sentence comes weeks after Salma al-Shehab, a 34-year-old PhD student at Leeds University and mother of two children, was convicted and sentenced to 34 years in prison after she returned home to Saudi for a holiday break. Court documents in Shehab case revealed she had been convicted for the alleged crime of following the Twitter accounts of individuals who “cause public unrest and destabilise civil and national security”. In some cases, she retweeted tweets posted by dissidents in exile. Shehab told a Saudi court she had faced abuse and harassment during her detention, including being subjected to interrogations after being given medications that exhausted her. In Qahtani’s case, Saudi authorities appear to have imprisoned her for “simply tweeting her opinions”, said Abdullah Alaoudh, the director for the Gulf region at Dawn. “It is impossible not to connect the dots between Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s meeting with President Biden last month in Jeddah and the uptick in the repressive attacks against anyone who dares criticise the crown prince or the Saudi government for well-documented abuses,” Alaoudh said. Dawn was coming forward with the news, he said, in the hopes that people who know Qahtani might shed light on her case. Saudi laws are designed to give authorities maximum discretion, including the power to detain individuals for vaguely defined anti-terrorism laws such as “disturbing public order” and “endangering national unity”. Qahtani does not appear to have had a Twitter account in her own name. Other Saudis believed to have used pseudonyms to post satirical or critical content on Twitter have faced detention and arrest. Twitter has not commented publicly on Shehab’s case. The US State Department on Monday said it has raised “significant concerns” with Saudi authorities about Shehab’s case. “We have made the point to them that freedom of expression is a universal human right to which all people are entitled and exercising those universal rights should never be criminalised,” said a spokesperson, Ned Price. Pressed by reporters on the matter, Price said the State Department was following the case “very closely” and that the US had had “a number” of conversations with Saudi counterparts in recent days. The Saudi government was not immediately available for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T08:47:08Z'}, {'id': '630cf5ec8f080ba02dce97c9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the last few months, Dr Jeannina Smith has seen organ transplant recipients who have been very careful throughout the pandemic venture out for one activity, contract Covid-19 and lose their transplant.\n“I have been at the bedside of a transplant recipient” who “was very ill and in the hospital, and she got Covid the second time in a healthcare setting”, said Smith, medical director of the infectious disease program at University of Wisconsin Hospitals and Clinics. “She was sobbing because she said, ‘It’s so hard for me to see that people care so little about my life that wearing a mask is too much for them.’” While much of US society has breathed a collective sigh of relief at no longer having to wear a mask in public, that freedom has placed people who are immunocompromised at risk, such as Smith’s patients. Nor are they the only ones. Older adults, the very young and those with long Covid are at greater risk too. So while for many Americans the pandemic increasingly feels over, for others – often the most vulnerable – it rages on. As Smith puts it, “What troubles me as an infectious disease specialist with an interest in public health is the abandonment of the idea that public health exists to protect the most vulnerable.”\nAbout 7 million people in the United States are immunocompromised, according to the American Medical Association. That includes people who are organ or stem cell transplant recipients, or who have cancer, certain genetic disorders or take an immunosuppressive medication. While there are now vaccines and better treatments for Covid and variants that appear to cause less severe disease than earlier ones, people like Smith’s patients still face a significant risk of becoming very sick or dying from Covid in part because they take medications that suppress their immune systems, she said. “The problem is that the vaccination is less potent if you aren’t able to make a good immune response and so much of the protection that other people are afforded by vaccination” doesn’t protect transplant patients, Smith said. And when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) stopped enforcing a mask mandate for public transportation in April, it made traveling harder for people who are immunocompromised, Smith said. Several of her patients contracted Covid while traveling. “They have an increasing number of family members who are out and about, exposed and actually having Covid, and it makes them feel, rightly, that they are less able to do the things that they did safely,” Smith said.\nOlder adults also continue to face a greater risk from Covid. Of the more than 146,000 people who have died this year from Covid, 77% were over the age of 65. “The risk of dying is not as great as it was before we had vaccines – not even close – but this is not a fun virus to get, and if you’re in your 80s, for example, you don’t really want to get any colds; you don’t want to get sick because you have less reserve,” said Dr Michael Wasserman, a geriatrician and chair of the Public Policy Committee of the California Association of Long Term Care Medicine. But older adults must also balance that need for caution with the need for social engagement, which is also important to people’s health, Wasserman said. That’s difficult in some senior housing where “the lazy approach to dealing with the health and wellness of older adults is to isolate them, and it takes away their choice”, said Wasserman. “We are at a point where this pandemic should not keep older people from socializing.” The key for older adults is getting a second booster of the Covid vaccine, Wasserman said. He also recommends that older adults wear masks when they are indoors around people they don’t know. “I don’t want to be alarmist. I think that’s the key here. I think people can live their lives,” he said. “I’m 63, and I’m doubly boosted, and when I go to the supermarket, I wear my N95” mask. But wearing a mask can also be taxing on people who are required to do so in their jobs, said Erica Birkley, assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral neuroscience in the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine.\n“It can be a lot more difficult to get a sense of the other person’s emotions,” said Birkley, who also provides psychotherapy. “We also tend to drink less water or not take as many breaks throughout the day … We can get into a pattern of essentially being depleted in ways related to having to wear a mask.” The key is ensuring that people can take mask breaks, she said. It can also be helpful to think about how wearing a mask could benefit others, she said. “It is usually going to be cathartic for me to think about the possible positive ripple effect for another human being in that room who possibly might be immunocompromised,” she said. People with long Covid also often must contend with a lack of recognition of their disease, said Dr Monica Verduzco-Gutierrez, who chairs the department of physical medicine and rehabilitation at University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio and founded its Post-Covid Recovery Clinic. Almost one in five US adults who had Covid continued to have long Covid symptoms in June, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. Symptoms include severe fatigue; shortness of breath; heart palpitations; brain fog; and sleep problems.\n“Even though yes, we are learning more, we don’t have a biomarker yet. We don’t have definitive treatments,” Gutierrez said. “A lot of people see it as a legitimate disease, and then I’m on social media … and occasionally people will say, ‘Well, how do you know it’s not just anxiety?’” A new Brookings Institution report estimates that between 2 and 4 million people in the United States are out of work due to long Covid. Gutierrez said her patients can only obtain social security disability insurance or employer disability insurance benefits “very infrequently”. “Everyone was hoping that they would get over it or that time will heal it, and they are just still not feeling that way,” Gutierrez said. *** Before contracting Covid in January 2021, Jennifer Ramey spent almost three decades as a cardiology nurse and ran 20 marathons and hiked some of Colorado’s 14,000ft mountains. “I loved what I did and was a hopeless romantic nurse and loved patient care,” she said.\nBut she has been out of work since February 2021 and feels exhausted after walking a couple of aisles at the grocery store, she said. She spent eight months in rehab – some of it inpatient – working with physical, occupational, recreational and speech therapists. While she is now able to again drive, she still must do cognitive workbooks featuring pattern identification and word search exercises. Ramey also lost her job. She applied for disability benefits, but the Social Security Administration recently denied her. She plans to appeal. She does not expect that she will be able to return to work as a cardiology nurse. “I should probably never check defibrillators and pacemakers. Even though I can do it in my head, I know my head is slower than it needs to be for something like that,” said Ramey. “I will never do the things that I loved as a nurse as far as the critical thinking part.” Still, Gutierrez is encouraged by some of the recent research on long Covid. For example, a study from a Yale University researcher, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, found that cortisol levels were often lower among long Covid patients as compared to control groups. That’s important because it could mean they are closer to identifying a biomarker for long Covid, which could lead to treatments and prove to “the naysayers, the insurance companies that this means you have long Covid, or this means you are impacted by long Covid”, Gutierrez said. Smith, the transplant infectious disease specialist, also said she was hopeful that nasal vaccines under development could help reduce the risk of infection rather than just preventing severe outcomes, which would be helpful for her patients who are more vulnerable to the virus. But even if that turns out to be the case, Smith remains discouraged by the lack of societal concern for such patients and doesn’t expect that to change. “I think that the damage to public health is profound,” Smith said. “And in regards to Covid, I think likely permanent.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T12:44:39Z'}]}