{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Bibi v no Bibi’: Israel’s voters split on comeback of scandal-hit Netanyahu', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-23T07:00:32Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/23/bibi-v-no-bibi-israel-voters-split-on-comeback-of-scandal-hit-netanyahu', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Benjamin Netanyahu', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Israel', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Bethan McKernan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bethan-mckernan'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/worldnews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '4a84295c-7a6b-4e3a-ae71-bcf6c6a35e7d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Cuba’s favourite ballerina, Viengsay Valdés, will run on to the stage of the island’s National Theatre on 2 November, fairly certain it won’t collapse beneath her. Reprising the role of Giselle she first performed 25 years ago, she can’t use Havana’s more glamorous auditorium, the rococo Gran Teatro de la Habana Alicia Alonso, because that is being devoured by woodworm.\n“It is a pity, because I wish to have the International Ballet Festival there,” she said. “It is the home theatre of [Cuba’s national ballet] company but it has been under repair for a year and a half now.” The 44-year-old recently took over as director of the storied company and so also director of its biennial ballet festival, which opens this weekend. Her arrival marks a generational shift. Valdés became director during the pandemic, following the October 2019 death of Alicia Alonso, Cuba’s prima ballerina assoluta, at 98. She now has the task of renewing the ballet’s reputation at a time when Cuba finds itself in a deep economic crisis. It will not only be the country’s famously enthusiastic audience she faces in this role, but power cuts, food shortages, collapsing theatres and Cuba’s youth fleeing the island. And if that wasn’t enough, she pointed out: “In the middle of all the preparation I gave birth.” Valdés was poised and open, sitting in front of a tall sculpture in her office in a colonial townhouse in Havana’s Vedado neighbourhood. Around her were the laughter and shouting of principal dancers in rehearsal. She said that over 30 years Alonso had taught her many things, but not how to be a director: “She didn’t teach me that.” Alonso, a star of American Ballet Theatre, was asked by the young revolutionary Fidel Castro to create a national company of which Cubans could be proud, but she became almost as revered a figure as Castro himself.\nIn other countries ballet is seen as an elite art. In Cuba, Alonso and her husband Fernando toured, performing on the back of a truck to campesinos who emerged from the cane fields on horseback, wives perched up front. They created a Cuban style of classical ballet that was unique, and which set their company alongside the great companies of the world. “Fernando studied the Cuban body, of which Alicia was the perfect model, and decided which of the various schools of ballet – the English, the Russian, the French, was better suited to Cuba,” said Valdés. “They also used Cubans’ musicality. That gave us the quality and characteristics to be different.” Over the decades, however, Alonso’s grip calcified and the company, its young dancers included, became widely seen as a mausoleum of her own making. While the quality of the dancers endured, Alonso’s programmes became an endless tribute to herself. Many dancers left, but Valdés stayed. “I had an international career,” she said. “I have danced in Japan, I danced in front of the pyramids in Egypt. And then I’d come back and feel so well received. It’s nice to be an ambassador of your country.” Now she wants to open the company’s dancers to a world of modern dance that has been denied them. “Dancers need to be versatile, they need to feel the movements of classical, neoclassical and contemporary dance. In the toughest moment of the pandemic I brought 10 international choreographers to the National Ballet of Cuba. I want to bring a new way of seeing.” The problems Valdés faces would overwhelm a less resilient figure. Nearly all Havana’s theatres are unusable, including the Grand Teatro, whose main stage, once named for Garcia Lorca, was renamed for Alonso. Another huge issue is migration. Since the beginning of the year, almost 200,000 Cubans have crossed into the US alone, close to 2% of the population, often after terrifying journeys. Many are the country’s younger and more ambitious – and they have included 20 dancers from the ballet company. “Some of the reasons are personal, some economical, some are for the reunification of the family, but they have chosen to take a different way. Now I have 70 dancers, a good number. They are very young, but I want to offer them opportunities. I want to give younger dancers principal roles. That never happened before.”\nTraditionally, the biennial festival has been a spectacularly dramatic showcase of international talent. Despite the difficulties, it began with stars such as the Bolshoi’s Semyon Chudin and American Ballet Theatre’s Roberto Bolle, and concludes in November with a performance of Carmen by Spain’s National Dance company. What appeared to excite Valdés the most, however, is the return of dancers who had once left Cuba, such as the Berlin State Ballet’s Yolanda Correa, and Catherine Zuaznabar, a black ballerina who danced with the Ballet Bejart of Lausanne. Alonso faced a lot of criticism for sidelining black dancers, most famously the great star of Britain’s Royal Ballet, Carlos Acosta, who even made a film including the experience, Yuli. Acosta’s own company, Acosta Dance, will also be performing at the festival. As if to reinforce the difficulties Valdés faces, the lights went out during her interview with the Guardian – one of the regular blackouts that plague Cuba thanks to a moribund infrastructure. Unflustered, she gathered herself, preparing to go and rehearse Giselle, the role that originally made Alonso famous. “I am back to dancing, too,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T20:30:23Z'}, {'id': '634e5dc48f08decc6572c04e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s reputation has deteriorated rapidly over the last four years, particularly in the west, and a large share of global opinion would back some form of international help for Taiwan if Beijing tries to take the island by force, according to a survey. It comes as Xi Jinping warned of “dangerous storms” on the horizon as he was confirmed on Sunday as Chinese leader for a precedent-breaking third term, and as Washington warns that Beijing is accelerating plans to annex the island. The YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project also found that while sentiment towards China was significantly more favourable in other parts of the world than it was in the west, respondents in 20 of the 25 countries surveyed prefer the US as reigning superpower.\nThe survey revealed a dramatic decline in China’s global standing since it was first run in 2019, with the percentage of respondents saying they felt China played a positive role in the world falling by as much as half in some countries. Pro-China sentiment has collapsed over the past four years from 46% to 24% in Poland, 36% to 17% in France, 30% to 13% in Germany, 32% to 11% in Denmark, 41% to 24% in Italy, 35% to 11% in the UK and 44% to 23% in India. It has fallen from 27% to 18% in the US. While Covid-19 partly informs this negative sentiment, with majorities of more than 80% convinced that the pandemic started in China and considerable proportions (at least 40% in many countries) suspecting it originated or was created in a laboratory, human rights abuses also appear to be an increasing focus. In countries including France (45%, up from 39%), Germany (53%, up from 46%), Denmark (53%, up from 45%), Spain (30%, up from 21%) and Greece (29%, up from 18%), more people this year than last selected China from a list of countries as one they believed had “put hundreds of thousands of its own citizens, or more, into mass prison camps, without fair and proper legal process”.\nThe UN’s outgoing human rights commissioner said in a report last month that China had committed serious human rights violations against Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang province, possibly amounting to crimes against humanity. The report found there was an acute risk of arbitrary detention and that it was “reasonable to conclude that a pattern of large-scale arbitrary detention occurred in [vocational education and training centre] facilities, at least during 2017 to 2019.” The YouGov research, carried out between 24 August and 22 September, identified a significant bounce in positive opinion of the US, with several countries showing a V-shaped pattern whereby positive views fell from 2019 to 2020 but then climbed back up, often to reach a new high, over the past two years. US leadership has become markedly more popular: this year, for example, 62% of respondents in Germany said they preferred the US over China as the most powerful force in world politics, against 43% in 2019, and 67% in the UK, up from 52%. In the vast majority of countries, moreover, far more people chose the US over China as their preferred superpower, undermining Beijing’s hopes of being seen as an alternative source of global leadership – by margins of 77% to 15% in Nigeria, 69% to 9% in India, 48% to 23% in Mexico, 59% to 11% in Brazil, and 45% to 19% in Greece. Nonetheless, said YouGov’s academic director, Joel Rogers de Waal, there was still some good news for China in the results, which showed “an obvious divide between the west and other parts of the world in general sentiment towards it”. Majorities in nine out of 12 non-western countries in the survey had positive views of China’s role in the world, and there was evidence that Beijing’s post-pandemic reputation was improving in several countries. In Mexico, positive views of China rose to 59% this year, from 50% in 2021. Positive opinions in Egypt and Saudi Arabia rose to 57% this year from 47% and 41% respectively in 2021, while Thailand, Kenya and Nigeria showed similar jumps. On Taiwan, majorities in about half the countries questioned – including Britain (51%), Australia (62%) and the US (52%) – believed that “other countries should provide help to Taiwan” if China used force to annex the island.\nSweden (55%), Denmark (51%) and, beyond the west, India (51%), Japan (55%), Kenya (63%) and Nigeria (60%) also showed majorities, while in most other countries, including France, Germany, Spain and Poland, more people (38%, 43%, 38% and 40%) favoured providing help to Taiwan than not (22%, 27%, 22% and 15%). Backing for a US-led alliance providing heavy weapons or troops to Taiwan was generally low, but providing intelligence or military advisers – and imposing heavy economic sanctions on China – was supported by at least 40% of respondents in 10 of the 13 western countries surveyed. Countries such as Sweden, Poland, the UK, the US, India and the three African countries of Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa were also willing to consider “hybrid warfare” measures such as cyber-attacks and pro-Taiwanese messaging. “In other words, public opinion reflects a combination of two sentiments,” Rogers de Waal said. “There’s a predictable aversion to the prospect of physical confrontation with China, but also considerable support for the cause of Taiwanese defence in principle.” He said the African countries in the survey could also highlight another significant trend, with all three showing high levels of support for help for Taiwan in the event of a Chinese attack, but also large majorities with a positive view of China’s role in world affairs. “Public opinion is often not as binary as the policy debate might suggest,” Rogers de Waal said. “It may be that plenty of people are capable of having both a sympathetic view towards the defence of Taiwan, and a favourable one towards China as a powerful force within the international system – albeit not as an outright alternative to it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T08:40:58Z'}, {'id': '6354d0358f0885fc0bbd3006', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping has stacked the senior Chinese Communist party ranks with loyalists, showing China’s ever more powerful leader favours loyalty over merit – and wants rule insulated from criticism or questioning. The appointments, which were revealed on Sunday, have raised concerns that Xi has surrounded himself with “yes men” as he leads China through what he called the “choppy waters” of the future, some of which are of his own making. The country is facing domestic economic troubles and worsening global tensions as Xi doubles down on threats to annex Taiwan. At the conclusion of the party’s twice-a-decade congress on Sunday, the new members of the most powerful political bodies were revealed to include Xi acolytes in the most senior positions, with factional rivals swept away.\nThe already poor female representation at the top was also erased. For the first time in 25 years there was no woman on the politburo; there has never been a woman on the highest seat of power the politburo standing committee. As expected, Xi was reappointed for a precedent-breaking third term as head of the party, and chair of the military, having abolished term limits in 2018. A decade of political purges, increased surveillance and tightened social control has resulted in the 69-year-old leader consolidating personal power to a level not seen since Mao Zedong. Sunday’s appointments, which also brought domestic security chiefs and military figures into his circle of power, showed Xi had now effectively rooted out potential opposition to him being leader for life, analysts said. “The new politburo is an emphatic statement of Xi’s dominance over the party,” Richard McGregor, a senior east Asia analyst at the Sydney-based Lowy Institute thinktank, told Reuters. “Xi has dispensed with the old factional system, such as it was. He has crushed expectations that he would nurture a successor. He has ignored the informal age caps on officials serving in top positions.” Sung Wen-ti, a lecturer in political science at the Australian National University, said the lineup was an “an unmistakable sign that the era of winner takes all politics is upon us”. “Xi has reiterated several times that the performance indicators that matters above all in Xi’s new era is political loyalty,” said Sung. “He felt no need to assign a spot to an alternative faction, which shows his priority is projecting dominance over magnanimity, when he is facing international pushback.” On Sunday morning, the seven members of the new politburo standing committee (PSC), Xi’s inner circle, were presented to the press. Filing on stage in order of descending rank behind the president, the men ranged from a friend with ties to his family going back decades, to more recent aides who have proved their commitment to his rule and a hardline ideologue who is his chief political theorist. Out of the door went senior figures considered to be prospective rivals to Xi, including Li Keqiang, who was premier, and Wang Yang, widely seen as a candidate for the next premiership but now removed from the 204-member central committee entirely, sending him and Li into retirement. Hu Chunhua had been tipped as a prospective new PSC member, but Xi found no place for the 59-year-old who was perceived by some analysts as a potential threat to the leader. Hu was considered to be the least Xi-aligned prospect, having risen through the ranks as a member of the Communist youth league, Xi’s rival faction linked to former leader Hu Jintao. Hu was escorted from the stage at the closing of the party congress on Saturday, apparently reluctantly, in an episode that sealed Xi’s pre-eminence.\n“The more Xi is surrounded by “yes” men … the greater the concern that Xi will only hear what people think he wants to hear, not what he needs to hear,” said Prof Margaret Lewis, an expert on Chinese and Taiwanese law at Seton Hall University. “This is a worrisome trend and it’s hard to see it reversing course as Xi’s leadership continues.” The Xi era so far has led to China becoming increasingly isolated from the west amid tensions over human rights abuses, regional expansionism and aggression, and economic troubles exacerbated by the weaponisation of trade and Beijing’s commitment to a zero Covid policy that has proved damaging to the country’s economy and beyond. Xi’s commitment to annex and “re-educate” Taiwan were this week enshrined in the party constitution. In a short speech on Sunday, Xi said China would remain open to the world but reasserted his belief in China’s dominance, and warned again of the need to navigate “choppy waters” and “dangerous storms” in China’s future. “Foreign investors and businesses have desperately searched for signs that liberals or ‘reformers’ will play a role in shaping the economy or bringing back an old economic order that prioritised foreign investment and liberalisation of the economy,” said Drew Thompson, a visiting senior research fellow at National University of Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew school of public policy. “It is clear from the outcome of the 20th party congress that national security and the party’s political security will take precedence over economic growth.” Xi also eschewed convention on Sunday by not replacing retiring vice-premier Sun Chunlan, the sole female PSC member. It is the first time in 25 years there has been no woman in the decision-making body. Dr Willy Lam, a senior fellow at the US-based Jamestown Foundation, said the party had at least in the past paid lip service to gender diversity in its ranks. He said there was at least one female candidate, Shen Yueyue, a former executive deputy head of the powerful Organisation Department, who qualified for elevation but had a background in the Communist youth league. “To Xi, the most important priority is to exclude the Communist youth league or people who might threaten him [in the politburo. He wouldn’t care about whether there are women or not,” Lam said. Lam also said the exclusion of Hu, previously widely seen as a top candidate for premiership owing to his incumbent role as a vice-premier of the state council and rich experience in regional governance, sent a message of “deliberate humiliation” to the Communist youth league faction. The inclusion of the minister of state security, Chen Wenqing, an intelligence officer, in the politburo was another sign Xi was confident of his control over all factions, said the China analyst Alex Joske. “Past ministers of state security have traditionally been seen as a ‘compromise candidates’ without their own political heft, because no faction wants the other to monopolise such powerful intelligence and security functions that could be used against political rivals,” said Joske, the author of Spies and Lies: How China’s Greatest Covert Operations Fooled the World. “Xi Jinping has heavily purged the security apparatus since becoming leader, which points to both how he recognises it as a potential threat and an incredible source of power. In the wrong hands, it could be used to mount resistance to Xi. The outcome of this party congress suggests that Xi now believes he has the total loyalty of his security tsars.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T11:48:53Z'}, {'id': '635284f18f08cf43e4141fd8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dressed in a black sweater, with “Propaganda” written in bold white letters across the back, Marco, 32, and his two friends had travelled to Predappio from their home in the Marche region to pay their respects at the grave of Benito Mussolini before the impending 100th anniversary of the fascist dictator’s march on Rome. The ornate Mussolini family crypt, located in the tiny San Cassiano cemetery of the Emilia Romagna town, has attracted thousands of admirers since it reopened on an all-year-round basis in March, with the daily flow increasingly more consistent since the late September general election victory for a coalition led by Giorgia Meloni’s Brothers of Italy, a party with neofascist origins, which was sworn into government on Saturday.\nMarco and his friends hope Meloni, Italy’s first female prime minister, can repeat “the good things Mussolini did” and “make Italy strong again”. “We need a strong, authoritarian figure,” said Marco after saluting the white marble coffin, draped with the Italian flag, containing the body of the man known as Il Duce: The Leader. Meloni, the 45-year-old firebrand politician from Rome who in August said her party had “handed fascism to history” decades ago, will make her first speech to parliament this week and must win votes of confidence in both chambers before a coalition, which includes Matteo Salvini’s far-right League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, can formally take full power. The path to government has been rocky, amid simmering rivalries between Meloni and Berlusconi, the three-times former prime minister who described her as “arrogant” and last week sparked further tumult after telling Forza Italia parliamentarians that he blamed Ukraine for the war with Russia and had “rekindled” his friendship with Vladimir Putin. Before receiving her mandate, Meloni reiterated that her government would be ardently pro-Nato and that anyone who rejects that “cannot be part of the government”.\nRivalries aside, the full assumption of power for Meloni’s administration will uncannily fall around 28 October, the date on which, in 1922, Mussolini and his armed fascist troops marched from Milan to Rome “to take by the throat our miserable ruling class”. Two days later, King Vittorio Emanuele III handed him power. Brothers of Italy, which retains the neofascist symbol of a burning flame of the tricolour flag as its logo, also took the biggest share of the vote in Predappio, a town of about 6,000 inhabitants where Mussolini was born. Nestled among the hills of the Apennines, Predappio became a fascist pilgrim site from the moment Mussolini took power. The rustic house in which he was born, which can still be visited today, stood as a testimony to his humble roots and how far he had gone in life, although the prime site for pilgrims even back then was the family crypt, where admirers could pay tribute to his mother, a teacher who died in 1905, for having given birth to him. Predappio, rebuilt by Mussolini in the 1930s, was liberated from fascism in 1944, but the cult of the dictator lingered despite the town being ruled by leftwing parties in their various guises until 2019, when Roberto Canali, an independent politician backed by Brothers of Italy and with close ties to Mussolini’s descendants, was elected mayor.\nPredappio Tricolore, a souvenir shop teeming with fascist memorabilia, including copies of Adolf Hitler’s Mein Kampf, has always done brisk trade, especially since Canali maintained his election campaign pledge for the year-round opening of the crypt. He recently sparked controversy after refusing to grant patronage to a march organised by Italy’s anti-fascist association, ANPI, to coincide with the 78th anniversary, also on 28 October, of Predappio’s liberation from fascism. He argued the event would bring too much disruption to the town on a work day. “The problem is, when you have thousands of people, as they expect, marching for at least an hour, it will completely block the town,” Canali told the Observer. “It’s not as if I unauthorised it. The march is still going ahead – I welcome Predappio’s liberation being celebrated – but not on that day and not in that way.” But Canali has no qualms with Mussolini’s relatives hosting a series of events to commemorate the march on Rome, including two masses to be celebrated by Giulio Maria Tam, an ultrafascist excommunicated priest. An exhibition displaying more than 160 objects, including weapons, uniforms and photos related to the march on Rome, is being held until early November.\nThe date 28 October has always been a busy period for Predappio, but because of the milestone anniversary and current attention on the topic of fascism, Canali anticipates 1,000 to 2,000 Mussolini admirers converging on the town this week. Meloni has tried to moderate Brothers of Italy, presenting the party as a conservative champion of patriotism. But the recent election of Ignazio La Russa, a Brothers of Italy co-founder who collects fascist memorabilia, as upper house speaker; and Lorenzo Fontana, an ultra-Catholic, Eurosceptic, and pro-Russia politician from the League, as speaker of the lower house, has raised concerns. “Despite keeping the neofascist symbol in its logo, I really hope Brothers of Italy becomes just a normal rightwing party,” said Gianfranco Miro Gori, a local leader of ANPI. “But the initial signs are not good. They are already saying lots of unkind things about various civil rights. So we need to keep our guard up.” Meloni will be in charge of steering Italy through one of its most delicate periods, dealing with challenges such as the energy crisis and high inflation while trying to avert a recession. “Italy was in a complicated period when the King gave Mussolini command,” said Franco Moschi, a distant Mussolini relative who collects historical documentation and curates exhibitions about the period. “He was the new soul of Italian politics. Today, with the great difficulties in Italy and Europe, Italians have taken a bet on Meloni.” The reverberations of that gamble are reflected in some of the messages that have filled the tribute book in Il Duce’s crypt since the elections. “Today the flame of the tricolour burns in the Italian government,” wrote one visitor. Another said: “Duce, 100 years ago you started a glorious period. Today, we can finally remember it freely.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T10:26:00Z'}, {'id': '6354c28b8f0885fc0bbd2fdc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s leader, Xi Jinping, claimed his third term in power this weekend, and swept men from rival factions out of the politburo standing committee, the seven-strong nucleus of political power in China. It is now packed with men – there has never been a woman on the PSC – who are loyal Xi acolytes, in what one analyst described as “maximum Xi”. They range from a friend with ties to the Xi family going back decades to more recent aides who proved their commitment as he consolidated power over the years, and the hardline ideologue who is his chief political theorist. After Mao’s death, the Chinese Communist party (CCP) tried to normalise a collective leadership that made the general secretary of the party a kind of “first among equals” on the PSC. That era is over. However, the PSC members still wield immense power and will be key in shaping and implementing Xi’s vision for China and the CCP.\nBelow are brief introductions to these seven men. New entrants to the politburo have a star (*) by their name Politburo standing committee Xi Jinping, 69 Xi took charge of the Communist party, and so of China, in late 2012. He has used this week to cement his power, and remove all political rivals from the politburo standing committee. He has been given another five years in power, and is likely to stay on beyond that. He his positions as general secretary of the Chinese Communist party and chair of the central military commission were renewed at the party congress. His position as president of the People’s Republic of China will almost certainly be renewed at the rubberstamp parliament, the National People’s Congress, next March. * Li Qiang, 63 Li Qiang, a close Xi ally, is party secretary of Shanghai, which has historically been a training ground for top national leaders. He is expected to be the next premier when Li Keqiang – now out of the standing committee and headed for retirement – steps down from the premiership in March. Li presided over the disastrous Shanghai Covid lockdown at the start of this year, doubling down on the “zero Covid” approach favoured by Xi despite a heavy economic and human cost. His elevation has widely been taken as a sign that Xi values loyalty, and familiar faces, over competence. From 2004 to 2007, when Xi was Zhejiang province’s top party boss, Li was his chief of staff. After Xi became China’s top leader, he promoted Li first to governor of Zhejiang and then party secretary of Jiangsu province, providing him with the regional governing experience and credentials he needed for bigger roles. Zhao Leji, 65 Zhao Leji has his roots in two impoverished western provinces – Shaanxi, his ancestral home, and Qinghai, where in 2000 he became the youngest provincial governor in the country. He has been head of the party’s top anti-corruption watchdog, the central commission for discipline inspection, a key instrument in Xi’s strengthening CCP and personal control. He also headed the party’s powerful Organisation Department, overseeing the appointment of all senior officials across China. He used that post to show his loyalty, placing Xi’s allies into important positions across the country during the past decade. Wang Huning, 67 A key Xi ally, Wang is rare among senior communist cadres in having no administrative experience running a province or major city. Instead he is Xi’s political theorist, his closest adviser on ideology, propaganda and foreign policy. A former academic known for his theories on “neo-authoritarianism”, Wang advocated a strong, centralised state to counter foreign influence. Helpfully for Xi, he also believes in strong central leadership, rejecting the collective leadership introduced after Mao Zedong’s death in an effort to avoid repeating the excesses of that era. His official positions include serving as director of the central policy research office (CPRO) from 2002 to 2020. * Cai Qi, 66 Cai Qi, Beijing party secretary, was the surprise entry to the PSC. He featured on some long-lists of potential candidates, but had not been widely tipped for the top. His entry is another sign of how Xi values both loyalists and people he knew rising up through the ranks. Born in Fujian, the eastern coastal province that would shape Xi’s early career, Cai spent the start of his working life there. He moved on to nearby Zhejiang province, where Xi served as governor, before being put in charge of Beijing in 2017. He has been a prominent champion of the Zero Covid policy embraced by Xi, and successfully oversaw the 2022 winter Olympics. * Ding Xuexiang, 60 Ding Xuexiang is an old and trusted ally of China’s leader. He served as Xi’s political secretary when he was Shanghai party chief in 2007 and rose with him to become private secretary and gatekeeper when Xi took over the country. He studied mechanical engineering and began his career as a researcher at the Shanghai Research Institute of Materials, before moving into party roles full time. Ding’s behind-the-scenes roles mean he has an even lower public profile than China’s other leaders, even though the CCP is generally secretive about senior figures. He is the youngest member of the standing committee and at 60, the only one who would be eligible under the old rules to serve another term in 2027. However, Xi has already ripped up norms on retirement age, so others could potentially stay on too. * Li Xi, 66 Li Xi is a long-standing member of Xi’s inner circle. The two men have known each other, and reportedly been family friends, since the early 1980s when Li worked for a party veteran who was close to Xi’s father. He has risen steadily in the party through positions across China, in Shaanxi, Shanghai and Liaoning provinces. He originally studied Chinese language and literature, but more recently did an MBA at Tsinghua University. He is now party chief of affluent Guangdong province. There he is responsible for the development of the Greater Bay Area, Xi’s masterplan for an economic powerhouse that integrates nine Chinese cities with Hong Kong and Macau.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T22:35:23Z'}, {'id': '635195758f08032b8dcacdb4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Across seven decades of turmoil and change, one thing about China’s leadership has remained unchanged. It is all-male. Men led China into the famine of the Great Leap Forward, through the convulsions of the Cultural Revolution and during the economic opening of the 1980s and 90s. In Xi Jinping’s “new era” of digital authoritarianism, men remain in charge of the country. The Communist party has run China for 70 years, and in that time no woman has ever been a member of China’s Politburo Standing Committee, the small group that runs the country, much less led the party or been made president or premier. Today under Xi, the CCP took a step back, also eliminating women from the next level of power too, the now 24-member Politburo. The new all-male line-up was revealed the day Xi formally extended his rule for a further five years, after the closing of the 20th Communist party congress in Beijing. Since 1997, there had always been at least one female Politburo member, and briefly two. A quota system required at least one woman in senior leadership at each level below that, contributing a small but steady stream of candidates. The Covid tsar, Sun Chunlan, was the only woman on the outgoing Politburo, and one of only three women who have made it that far as political operators in their own right – rather than as wives of powerful men or propaganda tools – in over 70 years of Communist rule. Her politburo seat was thought to be earmarked for another woman after she stepped down, with two candidates named as likely frontrunners. But in a weekend of disturbing surprises, including the manhandling of former President Hu Jintao off the stage, the CCP revealed an all-male Politburo. “Chinese women have been excluded from the centre of political power at both local and central levels,” said Hsiu-hua Shen, professor of Sociology at Taiwan’s National Tsing Hua University, before the conference closed. “Without specific affirmative actions … it is very difficult for Chinese women to be able to enter political systems and shape policies.”\nAn uneasy relationship The party was formed during a civil war, in a highly patriarchal society and has been based on “masculine violence” and power struggles since its establishment, Shen added. The CCP has nearly 100 million members, but less than a third of the rank and file are women, and the numbers thin out, the higher up its ranks you climb. “China’s patriarchal political structure limits women’s upward mobility,” said Pan Wang, senior lecturer in Chinese and Asian studies at the University of New South Wales. “From the bottom to the top of the pyramid, women get fewer at each step of the hierarchy (from CCP members, to the party congress, central committee and the politburo). This can create biases in the nomination and selection process for leading positions in the party/state.” Chinese women are held back by a variety of factors, Pan said. They include cultural expectations that women do more in the home, a career structure that forces them to retire earlier than men, just as they might be reaching their professional peak, and education and socialisation that discourages them from political ambitions. The CCP has always had an uneasy relationship with feminists, in part because Communists claim to have liberated women themselves. Mao’s slogan “women hold up half the sky” became famous as half-tribute, half-promise to China’s women. That makes any woman still fighting for her rights potentially subversive, particularly at a time when Xi is openly distrustful of any civil organising. There have been repeated crackdowns on feminists, including arrests of women protesting against issues that do not obviously challenge the political system, such as sexual harassment. China’s #MeToo movement has made little progress.\nAmong the ranks of assembled dignitaries at the Party congress was Zhang Gaoli, the former vice-premier whom tennis champion Peng Shuai publicly accused of sexual assault last year. Peng went missing for weeks after making her accusations on social media. She was eventually seen in public after a high-profile international campaign, organised under the hashtag #WhereIsPengShuai, but has since kept a very low profile and said her post was misunderstood, while he still commands the political stage. “The CCP is still quite traditional when it comes to women at the very top. Recent crackdowns on feminist activists have further signalled a more traditionalist and conservative line,” said Mary Gallagher, professor of democracy, democratization and human rights at the University of Michigan. Communism made it easier for women to get an education and join the workforce, but as in many other countries they were still expected to do the majority of domestic work, a “double shift” that is tiring and limits career opportunities. With a falling birthrate on the brink of tipping China’s already fast-ageing population into decline, there is increasing pressure on young people to have more children. Academics and campaigners fear that may further hobble women’s hopes of getting more political power in China. “I fear that in the short term, China will follow other countries and restrict women’s access to abortion and contraception as a way to force women to have more children. Ultimately, these policies will backfire and fail, but they could increase repression and crackdowns on feminist politics,” Gallagher said. ‘One woman is OK’\nRequiring a minimal role for female cadres has opened the door a crack, but as the new Politburo line-up showed, has not changed a misogynist political culture. “The party has addressed it but in a relatively vague manner, if you look at the party constitution, there is a line about promoting women party members in leadership,” said Minglu Chen, senior lecturer in the Department of Government and International Relations at the University of Sydney. “In reality this policy has often been interpreted as “one woman is OK”, so there is only one woman. This obviously shows the quota system being adopted is effective, but more needs to be done.” And for nearly 700 million women who live in China, this is not just a matter of principle. “The one thing we could safely argue, with no woman in leadership, women’s issues would be under-represented.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T21:21:00Z'}, {'id': '6352d8b38f0885fc0bbd2517', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s current wave of Covid-19 cases appears to be peaking at a lower level than previous outbreaks of the Omicron variant of the disease, researchers have revealed. The news is encouraging – though scientists have also warned that a further wave of the disease could sweep the nation before the end of the year. “We need to be vigilant and monitor the data with great care, all the time,” said Professor Mark Woolhouse, of Edinburgh University. According to last week’s ONS survey, Covid case numbers have flattened out or are falling in five of nine English regions, as well as in Northern Ireland and Scotland. At the same time, children now have the lowest prevalence of the disease for some weeks. And while cases are still rising in 50-69 year olds, there has been a fall in prevalence among over-70s. “Hopefully that will soon be mirrored by a fall in hospitalisations,” added Woolhouse. But if the short-term prospects of avoiding a new wave of Covid-19 cases look fairly promising, longer-term forecasts are less reassuring because of the uncertainties involved. “The problem is that we have now got a soup of around 300 Covid-19 variants in existence,” said Professor Andrew Lee, of Sheffield University. “At the same time, different populations have got varying levels of immunity to Covid-19. That makes it really difficult to predict how future waves are going to behave.” Scientists have also warned that the nation faces the prospect of a parallel flu epidemic this winter, one that could be fuelled by low immunity levels in a population that has lost protection during Covid pandemic restrictions. This was raised last week when it was revealed that flu cases had climbed in England – though levels are relatively low overall.\nHowever, these fears were tempered by Professor Francois Balloux, of University College London. “The one piece of good news is that the flu vaccine that is now being given turns out to be really well matched to the strains that have begun to circulate in the population. That means it should provide good protection and hold down hospitalisations.” Predictions about future outbreaks of diseases like Covid or flu needed to be treated with care, added Woolhouse. “This time last year, when we had quite high levels of the Delta variant of Covid-19, expert after expert predicted really huge waves of the disease would sweep Britain in the autumn. And it never happened.” Instead, the nation was struck by a completely new variant, Omicron, which affected unprecedented numbers of people last winter. New sub-variants of Omicron have since appeared and these are circulating with one version, Omicron BA 2.75.2, being viewed as a serious potential threat. “However, it is still relatively rare in the UK,” added Woolhouse. Nevertheless, scientists accept that the risk of a completely new variant, one with severe pathogenic impacts, could appear at any time. “As long as Covid remains mild for most people, and doesn’t overwhelm health systems, governments will be able to ride the wave,” added Lee. “But if we get a more pathogenic, severe variant then that will dictate a very different response. And that remains a risk, without doubt.” Balloux said the prospect of a lethal new variant appearing remains scientists’ greatest fear about Covid and will require constant surveillance by health authorities and doctors, he told the Observer. “However, unless something terrible happens and a deadly new variant appears, I think in terms of Covid, things should be better than last winter and the winter before,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T18:09:27Z'}, {'id': '6352c3cb8f08ff8bc54ce2be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Everyone in the small courtroom on the second floor of Jerusalem’s district court is tired of straining their necks to look at the decade-old receipts for whiskey, cognac and cigars displayed on a screen. Even the key witness in one of former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s three corruption trials, is clearly bored with answering questions about how often her boss used to send expensive presents to Israel’s long-time leader. The 73-year-old’s absence hangs over the proceedings in much the same way his pugnacious brand of politics still haunts Israeli public life. While the panel of judges peered at slide after slide of photocopied invoices on that warm day in September, the subject of their investigation was already out on the campaign trail, executing his comeback. Next week, Israel will hold its fifth election in less than four years. As with every other poll since the political crisis largely triggered by allegations of breach of trust, bribery and fraud against Netanyahu, who was formally indicted in 2019, the vote on 1 November is a referendum on whether the head of the rightwing Likud party is the right person to lead the country. Five elections later, the Israeli public still can’t make up its mind. Opinion polls consistently predict Netanyahu’s bloc of rightwing and religious parties will again fall one or two seats short of winning a Knesset majority – but the former prime minster is running a sophisticated campaign, and has forged controversial new alliances in his effort to return for an unprecedented third stint in office. His personal and political futures are intertwined: becoming prime minister again is likely to be the easiest way to escape the consequences of his criminal trial. “The Bibi vs no Bibi blocs have broken the political distinctions that existed for decades in Israeli politics,” said Eran Amsalem, an assistant professor of communication at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, using Netanyahu’s well-known moniker. “Several of the major parties are not ideologically too distant from the Likud in terms of economic or security policy. No one says: ‘We are against Likud.’ They are all against Bibi,” he said. Netanyahu’s scandal-plagued 12-year-long premiership finally came to an end in June 2021, after a coalition of eight parties, some with little else in common, got together to remove him. It proved difficult, however, for the government to overcome its ideological incoherence. During his year in the wilderness as leader of the opposition, Netanyahu capitalised on the coalition’s disunity, encouraging opposition parties to vote against every bill the government proposed. The ambitious experiment collapsed just a year later after losing its razor-thin majority, damaging the credibility of its leftwing party members, who voted in favour of legislation entrenching the occupation of the Palestinian territories. This time around, several factors are still in play: depending on voter turnout in the Arab 20% of the population, and whether the struggling Jewish Home party can clear the Knesset threshold of 3.25%, either bloc could eke out a narrow victory.\nThe most significant difference between November’s election and the four before it, however, is the rise of far-right politician Itamar Ben-Gvir and his Religious Zionist ticket. Ben-Gvir, a former disciple of terrorist Rabbi Meir Kahane, became famous as a teenager for stealing the hood ornament from the car of prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, one of the architects of the Oslo peace process of the 1990s. “Just as we got to his car, we’ll get to him too,” he told a TV news crew. The prime minister was assassinated by a Jewish extremist weeks later. Ben-Gvir built a legal career defending Jewish suspects charged with terrorism and hate crime, and has been indicted himself more than 50 times for incitement. Several attempts to join the Knesset succeeded in 2021, when his alliance won six seats. Since then, the extremist politician has become more and more popular, picking up votes from a recently disbanded right-wing list. Ben-Gvir’s slate is currently expected to win the third-largest share of the vote in November’s election. His rise is partly thanks to Netanyahu, who has courted the far right over recent years and has reportedly promised the former lawyer a cabinet position in his next government. The Religious Zionist party’s newly announced “law and justice” proposal to reform the Israeli judiciary has been widely interpreted as an attempt to overturn the former prime minister’s corruption cases. But Ben-Gvir’s growing popularity has irked Netanyahu too. Israeli media recently reported that he demanded his list receives the justice, security and finance portfolios, and at a holiday event in Kfar Chabad last week security guards were sent to get the would-be coalition partner off the stage before Netanyahu came on, so the former prime minister could avoid being photographed together. Palestinian citizens of Israel and international observers are horrified at the prospect of Ben-Gvir becoming a cabinet minister: he has repeatedly called for Arab Israelis who are “disloyal” to the state to be expelled. Robert Menendez, chair of the US senate committee on foreign relations, has reportedly warned Netanyahu that including extreme-right politicians in a potential future government would harm relations between Washington and Tel Aviv. But for many voters on Israel’s right whom the Observer spoke to in West Jerusalem’s colourful Meyhane Yehuda market, a definitive end to the political deadlock – even if it means the formation of the most extremist government in Israeli history – is the preferred option. “I have been a Likud supporter all my life. I don’t care who is prime minister, I care that they can do the job,” said Abraham Levy, a 73-year-old greengrocer. A large portrait of Menachem Begin, the party’s founder, hangs on the back wall of his shop. “People support Bibi more because of his trial. They say, ‘Oh, he smoked some cigars’, but so what? Other prime ministers were taking envelopes of cash. It needs to end.” Many on the Israeli centre and left – as well as rivals within the Likud – are hopeful that November’s election will be the last in which Netanyahu stands. Amsalem, the Hebrew University professor, is not so sure. “People keep thinking Bibi will quit, or go for a settlement or a plea deal, but he decided to stay within the political system because it’s better for him to maintain a public platform. The trial is going to last a long time. Even if he’s convicted, he can appeal,” he said. “I think Netanyahu really believes he can win, he can figure it out. For him, it’s a matter of survival.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T08:21:47Z'}, {'id': '635137ae8f08032b8dcac7c5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tory plans to scrap most EU laws by the end of 2023, to show that Brexit is being delivered, risk causing untold legal chaos and yet more damage to British businesses, according to the former head of the government’s legal service. With the country still reeling from the effects of Liz Truss and Kwasi Kwarteng’s disastrous mini-budget, ministers are facing mounting opposition from business groups, environmentalists, legal experts, unions and opposition parties to what is being described as another dangerous, ideologically driven experiment by pro-Brexit Tory rightwingers. Last night Jonathan Jones, who headed the government legal service from 2014 to 2020, and dealt with issues relating to Brexit, warned that the retained EU law (revocation and reform) bill, which will have its second reading in the Commons on Tuesday, will create deep uncertainty for businesses and many other organisations. “I think it is absolutely ideological and symbolic rather than about real policy,” he said. Under the bill’s provisions, about 2,400 EU laws that were kept on the UK statute book after Brexit, to ensure continuity, will be automatically deleted at the end of next year, except in cases where ministers decide that there should be exemptions. The plan – which critics say could even mean the scrapping of rules ensuring sports events such as the Olympics can be watched free on television – has outraged unions, who fear the disappearance of laws protecting workers’ rights, and environmentalists, who believe well-established rules protecting wildlife habitats will be lost.\nJones says the government has given no clue as to which laws it plans to scrap, leaving organisations in all sectors completely in the dark as to what legislation will apply to them in future. Jones told the Observer: “As far as I can see there is no indication of which areas the government is thinking of retaining and which it is getting rid of. So there is no certainty about what laws we will have and what will replace them.” Business organisations say they need to know what regulations – such on standards for manufactured goods – they have to comply with years in advance. “It is a very, very bad way to change and make law,” Jones said. “This has nothing to do with Brexit. We have left. It creates great uncertainty within a very tight, and completely self-imposed timescale. There is nothing inherent in Brexit that says we have to change the law within a particular period after we have left. It has been driven by the usual suspects wing of the Tory party.” Lucy Monks, head of international affairs at the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB), said business groups had made their concerns clear. She said: “Among widespread economic instability and rampant inflation, changes to the regulatory environment for small firms must be carefully weighed up so as not to add an extra burden to already very difficult trading conditions.\n“A year just isn’t long enough for small businesses to work out how their operations will need to change in response to a fundamental shift in the regulatory environment, such as the one proposed by the EU revocation and reform bill.” Labour, which has been reluctant of late to take a stand on EU-related issues for fear of being branded anti-Brexit, will oppose the bill in the Commons. Shadow business secretary Jonathan Reynolds said: “The last things businesses and workers need is more instability and uncertainty. Not content with crashing our economy, the Conservatives now want to rip up the rules that businesses rely on to trade, and the rights workers rely on to work.” Stella Creasy, Labour MP for Walthamstow and chair of the Labour Movement for Europe, said that in a time of economic distress the bill could hardly be more destructive. She said: “It abolishes overnight thousands of laws, from those covering people’s pension protections, compensation rights if your luggage is lost or travel delayed, to those tackling insider trading, to maternity rights, as well as vital protections for our environment and water quality with no clarity as to what – if anything – will replace them.\n“In the light of the pandemonium in parliament, the only sensible thing to do is abandon this before it causes any more headaches for businesses and consumers alike, and start again tackling the problems Brexit has caused when it comes to the protection of EU law.” The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 created the concept of retained EU law, which meant that the bloc’s legislation continued to have force in the UK until the point at which parliament chose to change it. At the same time it was recognised that some retained EU law would need to be adapted, so as to work once the UK had left the EU. A government spokesperson said: “The government is committed to taking full advantage of the benefits of Brexit, which is why we are pushing ahead with our retained EU law bill, which will end the special legal status of all retained EU law by 2023. “This will allow us to rapidly develop new laws and regulations that best fit the needs of the country, removing needless bureaucracy to stimulate growth and cement the UK’s position as a world-class place to start and grow a business.” At risk: eight EU retained laws that could go • Controls that prevent cancer-causing materials from being used in cosmetics. • Rules guaranteeing major sporting events such as the Olympics are free to watch on television. • Protection for part-time workers so they do not get less favourable treatment than full-timers. • Minimum standards that ensure that aircraft are safe to fly. • Compensation for travellers in the event of delays and lost luggage. • Minimum requirements for maternity pay. • Protection for staff pensions when a company goes bust. • A ban on the trafficking of illegal weapons.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T14:21:44Z'}, {'id': '6354d3008f0885fc0bbd3010', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We are going to wrap up our live coverage now, you can read the full report on Xi Jinping securing a third term here, and find all our China coverage here. Thanks for joining us.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T06:02:55Z'}, {'id': '6354ca5c8f08ff8bc54cef62', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It has been an extraordinary and historic day in China. Here are the main developments: China’s Xi Jinping secured a precedent-breaking third leadership term on Sunday and introduced a new Politburo Standing Committee stacked with loyalists, cementing his place as the country’s most powerful ruler since Mao Zedong. Shanghai Communist Party chief Li Qiang is likely to succeed Li Keqiang as premier when he retires in March. The other members of the seven-man Standing Committee, China’s top governing body, are Zhao Leji and Wang Huning, who return from the previous committee, and newcomers Cai Qi, Ding Xuexiang and Li Xi. Li Qiang is also new to the Standing Committee. All are perceived to have close allegiance to Xi, 69, who was also re-appointed on Sunday as chairman of the Central Military Commission. The unveiling of the Standing Committee and the larger 24-member Politburo comes a day after the closing of the ruling Communist Party’s 20th Congress, where amendments were added to the party charter aimed at cementing the core status of Xi and the guiding role of his political thought within the party. The new Politburo contains no women members, where previously there was at least one, and has reduced in number to 24 from 25. The Standing Committee lineup is further confirmation that Xi’s grip on power is undiminished by the events of a tumultuous year, including a sharp economic slowdown, frustration over his zero-Covid policy, and China’s increasing estrangement from the West, exacerbated by his support for Russia’s Vladimir Putin.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:44:02Z'}, {'id': '6354d1798f08ff8bc54cef79', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More from Helen Davidson – the Standing Committee was formally selected by the powerful Politburo, the ranks of which were also revealed on Sunday. Shockingly, the new Politburo contains no women members, where previously there was at least one, and has reduced in number to 24 from 25.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:36:03Z'}, {'id': '6354cdeb8f08855c22ca548f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi and the members of the Politburo Standing Committee:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:21:23Z'}, {'id': '6354ccbe8f08855c22ca548c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is some more reaction via Reuters: Ja Ian Chong, political scientist, National University of Singapore. “It certainly seems to be a consolidation of Xi’s position. This means that policies will be more directly attached to Xi for good or ill. I guess that translates to more focus on party-state control over business, less dependence on imports even as the PRC (People’s Republic of China) seeks to export. So probably more direct party-state direction of the economy. Investment will likely seek to meet those above goals, especially if they can bring in technology. So while there may be opportunities for investors, they have to look to both market forces and political preferences more. So more of what we have already been seeing. “Probably no lifting of Covid-zero policy in the near future, and more assertiveness in foreign and security. Even more broadly, US-PRC friction will continue to grow.” Dylan Loh, assistant professor, Nanyang Technology University: “It’s quite clear that the Politburo have been stacked with Xi loyalists and that would mean he has a much freer rein and mandate in pursuing his domestic and foreign policies as collective leadership and decision making has been de-emphasised over coalescing around Xi and implementing his decisions. It seems that he has not elevated a potential successor for now, which gives him the flexibility for a fourth term. Regarding investment, I do not think China’s policies will turn sharply because of this line up, I think by and large Xi’s priorities have not changed.” “Wang Huning’s presence also indicates to me that the ideological bent of the party and Xi will continue and even deepen.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:12:28Z'}, {'id': '6354cb508f08855c22ca5483', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Helen Davidson has some snap reaction to Xi’s speech: Quite a short speech from Xi Jinping just then, announcing the line-up of the new Standing Committee. All are seen as Xi loyalists, with the surprise addition of Cai Qi. Hu Chunhua was nowhere to be seen. 59-year-old Hu was considered to be the least Xi-aligned prospect and, having risen through the ranks as a member of the Communist Youth League faction, was perceived by some analysts as a potential threat to Xi - in as much as that is possible in the current context. Xi’s speech touched on several of the same points he made during his 104-minute address at last Sunday’s Congress opening. He warned again of “choppy waters” and “dangerous” storms in China’s future dealings with the world. But he said China’s economy would continue “opening up”, and with global development and Chinese development both needing each other. China has hit economic troubles in the last year or so, with major slowdowns in growth. But he said China had created the twin miracle of fast economic growth and long term social stability, and these fundamentals would not change - suggesting the tight grip he has over the people’s lives and freedoms would remain. He praised the successes of the CCP in boosting the prosperity of the Chinese people, and reaffirmed commitments to grow even more, into a “modern socialist nation”. He again pledged to achieve “rejuvenation of the Chinese nation”, a goal which requires the annexing of Taiwan. Before leaving the stage, he invited the world’s media to visit China, saying he “welcomes unbiased and truthful stories about China”. He then takes no questions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:06:59Z'}, {'id': '6354caee8f08855c22ca547f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some analysis is coming in via Reuters: “In terms of policymaking, it does mean that there is likely to be more deference to Xi Jinping’s own views about how to move the country and the economy forward,” said Alvin Tan, head of Asia FX strategy at RBC Capital Markets in Singapore. “An abnormally lopsided victory for one faction, which is rare in the tradition of the Communist Party, in the past there would be a rough balance of power,” said Willy Lam, Senior Fellow at US think tank the Jamestown Foundation. “It means there won*t be any checks and balances. Xi Jinping also has total control over the larger Politburo and Central Committee,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:03:11Z'}, {'id': '6354c7848f08ff8bc54cef55', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Economic growth ‘downgraded’ as key party goal Chris Miller, professor at Tufts University, Massachusetts, said Congress has “reaffirmed Xi’s decisive role in ruling the Communist Party, marking a continued shift away from collective leadership of party elites toward a personalised dictatorship.” “It also appears to have confirmed the downgrading of economic growth as a key party goal, relative to other agenda items such as zero-Covid and the party’s political and ideological control. “On tech, the key theme was self-sufficiency in science and technology, which is to be expected given the increasing decoupling of the US and Chinese tech sectors,” professor Miller said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T05:00:03Z'}, {'id': '6354c8f58f08855c22ca547b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Li Qiang, the party secretary of Shanghai and a Xi ally, is likely to be appointed the next premier after Li Keqiang steps down from premiership in March after two terms. After it was revealed on Saturday that Wang Yang, previously thought to be a top contender for the post, was excluded from the list of some 200 central committee members, Li emerged to be a strong premier candidate in his current capacity as Shanghai’s party chief. Shanghai has historically been a breeding ground for top national leaders. While Li’s prospects might have been dented by the chaos of Shanghai’s protracted Covid lockdown, analysts say Xi values loyalty and trustworthiness above all and Li’s strong rapport with Xi over the years has put him in good stead. Li was Xi’s chief of staff from 2004 to 2007 when Xi was Zhejiang province’s top party boss. After Xi became China’s top leader, he promoted Li first to governor of Zhejiang and then party secretary of Jiangsu province, providing him with the regional governing experience and credentials he needed for bigger roles.\nUnlike most of the previous premiers, Li had no experience as a vice premier, but analysts say Li could be made a vice-premier in the next few months by the National People’s Congress Standing Committee and could then be appointed premier in March. Li has proven himself to be a loyal follower of Xi - even when Shanghai’s two-month Covid lockdown caused widespread discontent and exacted heavy economic cost, Li insisted on strictly implementing the “zero Covid” policy in Shanghai according to “the spirit of the important instructions by Party Secretary Xi Jinping.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:56:28Z'}, {'id': '6354c6d28f0885fc0bbd2fe7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Cai Qi was the big surprise entry to the PSC. Although he had featured on some long-lists of potential candidates, the Beijing party secretary had not been widely tipped as a likely member. His entry is another sign of how Xi values both loyalists and people he knew rising up through the ranks. Like Xi, he spent many years in Fujian province at the start of his career, and moved on to Zhejiang. More recently he has been a prominent champion of the Zero Covid policy embraced by Xi, and successfully oversaw the 2022 winter Olympics.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:46:36Z'}, {'id': '6354c5688f0885fc0bbd2fe1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi ended his speech with an invitation to the world’s journalists to visit China. It’s worth noting that conditions for journalists - both foreign and local - have diminished greatly under Xi’s rule. US journalists from major outlets were expelled in 2020.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:41:22Z'}, {'id': '6354c5058f08855c22ca5467', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some quick reaction from China watchers:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:38:40Z'}, {'id': '6354c3d98f08855c22ca5461', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping has finished speaking. Reuters reports that Shanghai Communist Party chief Li Qiang followed Xi onto the stage at the Great Hall of the People, meaning he is likely to succeed Li Keqiang as premier when he retires in March. The other members of the seven man Standing Committee, China’s top governing body, are Zhao Leji and Wang Huning, who return from the previous committee, and newcomers Cai Qi, Ding Xuexiang and Li Xi. All are perceived to have close allegiance to Xi.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:33:44Z'}, {'id': '6354c2c88f0885fc0bbd2fdd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The speech is ongoing. “China’s development can’t leave the world and the world’s development also needs China,” says Xi. Xi says China has created the twin miracle of fast economic growth and long term social stability. These fundamentals will not change. China will “open its door ever wider”, and will pursue “high quality development” he says, using a term which is being increasingly heard from Chinese officials no longer able to talk about China’s high speed growth which has dramatically slowed in recent months.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:31:06Z'}, {'id': '6354c26b8f0885fc0bbd2fdb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi is still speaking. He has said China must remain on high alert for challenges “like a student on never-ending exams”. He says the party “can only become invincible if it is committed to self reform, even if it has had a glorious past.” He said the party is stronger and more dynamic because of its struggles and achievements in the last century. Xi’s political thought now officially drives the party’s ideology - not just because he is the current leader but also after constitutional changes this week enshrined him as being at the “core” of the party.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:31:24Z'}, {'id': '6354c2128f0885fc0bbd2fda', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is Xi Jinping (C) and other new members of the Communist Party of China’s Politburo Standing Committee:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:25:14Z'}, {'id': '6354c1ad8f0885fc0bbd2fd7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi is repeating his warnings of “choppy waters” and “dangerous storms” to come - it’s heightened language compared to previous meetings which were more focused on peace and development, and reflects how much more isolated China has become from the west, with numerous disputes and tensions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:23:23Z'}, {'id': '6354c12f8f08ff8bc54cef3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi is praising the CCP’s work in achieving its first centenary goal of “moderate prosperity for all”, and says the work now is for the second goal of achieving a modern socialist nation, and the “great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation” - a goal which requires the annexation of Taiwan. “We have fought long and hard to open a Chinese path to modernisation,” he says. “The enormity of the task is what makes it great and infinitely glorious… Successive generations of Chinese have devoted themselves to this glorious goal. We should always remember their dedication and sacrifice.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:21:11Z'}, {'id': '6354c0888f0885fc0bbd2fcc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A loyal stalwart of Xi Jinping, Li Xi is already part of the top leader’s core inner circle. Li started his career in the party’s powerful the Organisation Department and rose steadily through the ranks in a series of key positions in the provinces of Shaanxi, Shanghai, Liaoning, and finally Guangdong over a period of 18 years. As the party chief of affluent Guangdong province which borders Hong Kong, he has already been in the 25-member Politburo for the past five years and is one of the most powerful non-Standing Committee politicians in the country. Li is the top official responsible for the development of the Greater Bay Area, Xi’s master plan for an integrated economic powerhouse of nine Chinese cities with Hong Kong and Macau.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:53:18Z'}, {'id': '6354bf698f08855c22ca5449', 'bodyTextSummary': '“I was reelected as the general secretary of the CPC central committee,” Xi says, before presenting the six other members. They are: Li Qiang, Zhao Leji, Wang Huning, Cai Qi, Ding Xuexiang, and Li Xi', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:13:38Z'}, {'id': '6354be718f08855c22ca5445', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping has been confirmed as leader of China for a precedent-breaking third term, after a week-long political meeting eliminated key rivals and strengthened his political power. Xi and the six members of the new Politburo Standing Committee have just walked on stage.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:10:28Z'}, {'id': '6354be5a8f08ff8bc54cef2e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi has been confirmed as the general secretary and is going to make some remarks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:09:00Z'}, {'id': '6354be088f08855c22ca5443', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping has walked out at the front the group.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:07:48Z'}, {'id': '6354bde08f0885fc0bbd2fc2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The press conference is beginning – stay tuned.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T04:07:08Z'}, {'id': '6354ba5b8f08855c22ca5437', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The stage is set in Beijing:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:59:55Z'}, {'id': '6354b8818f08855c22ca542a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping opened the Congress meeting last week with a speech laying out his vision for the next five years in China. Helen Davidson and Emma Graham-Harrison looked at the key take-aways:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:50:05Z'}, {'id': '6354af1e8f08ff8bc54ceeed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some scenes from the party congress area over the past few days:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:41:24Z'}, {'id': '6354b7208f08ff8bc54cef11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Across seven decades of turmoil and change, one thing about China’s leadership has remained unchanged. It is all male. Men led China into the famine of the Great Leap Forward, through the convulsions of the Cultural Revolution and during the economic opening of the 1980s and 90s. In Xi Jinping’s “new era” of digital authoritarianism, men remain in charge of the country. The Communist party has run China for 70 years, and in that time no woman has ever been a member of China’s Politburo Standing Committee, the small group that runs the country, much less led the party or been made President or Premier. Emma Graham-Harrison asks, where are the women at the top of Chinese politics?', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:39:25Z'}, {'id': '6354b2738f08855c22ca5417', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Saturday Xi Jinping strengthened his power as leader and elevated his status within Communist party (CCP) history, with major political resolutions announced on the final day of a key political meeting. The CCP congress approved amendments to its constitution, including the “Two Establishes” and “Two Safeguards”, aimed at enshrining Xi as at the core of the party and his political thought as its underpinning ideology. A list of reappointed delegates also confirmed the premier, Li Keqiang, would be retiring from politics, along with several other senior party figures. Analysts said their exclusion was a strong sign that the next politburo standing committee (PSC), to be unveiled on Sunday, would be dominated by Xi’s allies and his power would be further consolidated. Helen Davidson has the details here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:27:45Z'}, {'id': '6354b1c28f0885fc0bbd2f91', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Verna Yu has spoken to some experts about Xi’s third term could mean for China. Chen Daoyin, a political commentator formerly with Shanghai University of Political Science and Law said after the 20th party congress, China is expected to continue its current conservative and hawkish stance. He said domestically, it will continue to suppress dissent and internationally, it will be confrontational and adopt the “dare to fight” spirit as mentioned by Xi many times during the congress. He expects China to clash with the United States and Europe on issues over sovereignty, security and development. “‘Struggle’ is the main theme of this congress: It will ‘struggle’ internally and externally. It will ‘dare to fight’ and be ready for tit for tat,” said Chen. Willy Lam, a senior fellow at Washington-based think tank Jamestown Foundation, predicted the personality cult surrounding Xi will exacerbate. The party and country risk becoming a “one-voice chamber” where only one voice will be heard. The supreme leader has almost totally abandoned the institutional reforms started by Deng Xiaoping and largely followed by ex-presidents Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:17:14Z'}, {'id': '6354b0318f08ff8bc54ceef2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There was high drama at the closing of Congress on Saturday when former leader Hu Jintao was led out of the Great Hall of the People.\nHu, who is 79, and stepped down as head of the party 10 years ago, seemed confused and reluctant to leave his seat on stage. His unexpected exit prompted rampant speculation. It is unclear why he was removed, but China’s official news agency said he was feeling unwell. Emma Graham-Harrison reported on Hu’s unscheduled departure:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:40:51Z'}, {'id': '6354ad748f08855c22ca5405', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Today we are expecting Congress delegates to elect the Standing Committee - the apex of Chinese political power at which Xi is set to sit firmly at the top. The Standing Committee is then expected to be unveiled to foreign and domestic media at a press conference around noon (0400 GMT, 3pm AEST) at Beijing’s Great Hall of the People. A list of officials in the new Central Committee earlier revealed that four out of seven members of the Standing Committee will be replaced, allowing Xi to further pack the top body with loyalists. “Whichever way you look at it, it’s almost a total victory for Xi,” Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, told Agence France-Presse. The move will allow Xi to get a third term as China’s president.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T03:00:00Z'}, {'id': '6354ac9b8f0885fc0bbd2f7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'So what exactly is the Chinese Communist party’s Congress meeting, and why is it so important? Helen Davidson has the answers.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T02:55:04Z'}, {'id': '6354aaf28f08ff8bc54ceee1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Xi Jinping was 13 years old, at the height of China’s Cultural Revolution, he was denounced as a counter-revolutionary before a frenzied crowd in Beijing. Among his accusers was his own mother, forced to join in the taunting. China’s future leader was targeted mostly because his father, a top Communist cadre, was purged by Chairman Mao Zedong. His fall dragged the family down too; Xi’s half-sister died, reportedly after intense abuse. Half a century later, the teenage boy publicly humiliated in the capital has become China’s most powerful ruler since Mao, and perhaps – given his singular control of a superpower – the most powerful man in the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T02:48:34Z'}, {'id': '6354a9ab8f0885fc0bbd2f7a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hu Jintao ‘not feeling well’ when he left China congress, says state media Former Chinese president Hu Jintao was “not feeling well” when he was escorted out of the closing ceremony of a congress of the ruling Communist party on Saturday, according to state media. China’s official news agency Xinhua said in a tweet late on Saturday: “Xinhuanet reporter Liu Jiawen has learned that Hu Jintao insisted on attending the closing session of the party’s 20th national congress, despite the fact that he has been taking time to recuperate recently.” A second tweet said: “When he was not feeling well during the session, his staff, for his health, accompanied him to a room next to the meeting venue for a rest. Now, he is much better. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T02:44:56Z'}, {'id': '6354a92f8f08ff8bc54ceed9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s president Xi Jinping is poised to secure a historic third term in power, cementing his position as the nation’s most influential leader since founder Mao Zedong. Xi is all but certain to be unveiled as general secretary of the ruling Communist Party again - tilting the country decisively back towards one-man rule after decades of power-sharing among its elite. His anointment will cap a week-long gathering of the party faithful in China’s capital during which high-ranking cadres endorsed his “core position” in the leadership and approved a sweeping reshuffle that saw several top officials step down. Follow the developments here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T02:42:20Z'}]}