{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Bolsonaro promotes hatred’: violence stalks run-up to crucial Brazil election', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-15T09:30:26Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/15/jair-bolsonaro-brazil-political-violence-election', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Brazil', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jair Bolsonaro', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/jair-bolsonaro'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Tom Phillips', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomphillips'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 8, 'elements': [{'id': '67663f9a-9454-4206-8f58-5ead3bbff8d5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A tentative agreement has been reached to avert a freight rail strike that could have disrupted commuter rail services across the US, Joe Biden said on Thursday.\nA strike would also have dealt a major blow to Democrats two months before midterm elections in which they will try to keep control of the Senate and the House. A rail shutdown could have hit food and fuel supplies – freezing almost 30% of US cargo shipments by weight, stoking inflation, costing the US economy as much as $2bn a day and affecting the energy, agriculture, manufacturing and retail sectors. Biden hailed “a win for tens of thousands of rail workers who worked tirelessly through the pandemic to ensure that America’s families and communities got deliveries of what have kept us going during these difficult years”. Unions have said the industry is in crisis, with companies taking huge profits while the workforce shrinks. This week, Ross Grooters, a locomotive engineer for Union Pacific in Iowa and co-chair of Railroad Workers United, told the Guardian: “The job is just really becoming fewer people doing more work faster. We’ve seen in this country all workers getting more and more squeezed. “These railroads are making billions of dollars. In the past, we’ve been well compensated for being on call 24/7, 365 days a year. That’s been eroded over the course of my career in the last two decades to where it’s just not appealing enough to attract people into the workplace.” Negotiations between a dozen unions and railroads including Union Pacific Berkshire Hathaway’s BNSF, CSX, Norfolk Southern and Kansas City Southern stretched for more than two years, leading Biden to appoint an emergency board to help break the impasse. Administration officials hosted talks into the night on Wednesday, aiming to secure an agreement with unions that represent 115,000 workers. Failing to reach a deal before the deadline of one minute after midnight on Friday would have cleared the way for strikes. Announcing the deal in the small hours of Thursday, Marty Walsh, the US labor secretary, said: “The Biden administration applauds all parties for reaching this hard-fought, mutually beneficial deal. Our rail system is integral to our supply chain, and a disruption would have had catastrophic impacts on industries, travelers and families across the country.” Biden said: “These rail workers will get better pay, improved working conditions and peace of mind around their healthcare costs, all hard-earned. The agreement is also a victory for railway companies who will be able to retain and recruit more workers for an industry that will continue to be part of the backbone of the American economy for decades to come. “I thank the unions and rail companies for negotiating in good faith and reaching a tentative agreement that will keep our critical rail system working and avoid disruption of our economy.” Shares of US railroad operators rose between 2.4% and 2.9% in early trade. Before news of the deal, it emerged that Biden’s popularity rating had improved substantially from his lowest point this summer though concerns about his handling of the economy persist, according to the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research. Support for Biden recovered from a low of 36% in July to 45%. During bleak summer months when gasoline prices peaked and lawmakers appeared deadlocked, Democrats faced the possibility of blowout losses to Republicans in November. A string of legislative successes followed. However, the president’s approval rating remains underwater, with 53% of US adults disapproving of him, and the economy continues to be a weakness. Just 38% approve of Biden’s economic leadership as the country faces stubbornly high inflation and Republicans try to make household finances the axis of the upcoming vote. A rail strike would have affected some commuter lines, as many Americans head back to the office after the Covid pandemic. Other lines would not have been hit, depending largely on whether the commuter line owns its own tracks or uses tracks owned by freight companies. There are few feasible mass-transit alternatives for long-distance commuters. The largest commuter rail systems, all in metropolitan New York, were not affected. But before talks succeeded, the Metra system in Chicago said it was expecting disruptions on at least four of 11 lines. Commuter services in the Los Angeles and San Francisco Bay areas would also have been affected by a strike. The Sounder system in the Seattle area would have been forced to close. About 5,000 people ride Sounder trains each day – down from about 20,000 before the pandemic. In greater Minneapolis, transit agencies planned to offer bus service to replace the smaller Northstar service. The Association of American Railroads, which represents the freight rail industry, estimated that half the commuter rail systems in the country depended at least in part on tracks owned by the affected freight railroads. John Cline, director of government relations for the Commuter Rail Coalition, an industry trade group, told the Associated Press there are 36 commuter rail lines in the US and the impact of a strike would range from “potentially catastrophic” to negligible.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-15T15:40:31Z'}, {'id': 'f7096df5-b90b-4e79-b31f-84496f07ce8d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has lashed out at Moscow for what he said was a “vile” attack on his home city of Kryvyi Rih, parts of which were dramatically flooded after Russian cruise missiles blew up a nearby dam. In a video address released early on Thursday, the Ukrainian president said “everything is being done to eliminate the consequences of yet another vile Russian act”, referring to the targeting of a hydraulics system in Kryvyi Rih, on the Inhulets River 95 miles (150km) south-west of Dnipro.\nCity authorities fought to contain the damage to its water system after eight cruise missiles hit a water pumping station there in what Zelenskiy has called an attempt to flood the city, the largest in central Ukraine, with an estimated prewar population of 650,000. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, described the attack as “a war crime and an act of terror”. “Beaten by [the] Ukrainian army on the battlefield, Russian cowards are now at war with our critical infrastructure and civilians. Russia is a terrorist state and must be recognised as such,” he wrote on Twitter.\nThe Ukrainian legislator Inna Sovsun tweeted: “The water pumping station was destroyed. The river broke through the dam and overflowed its banks. Residential buildings are just a few metres away from the river.” Later on Thursday, Oleksandr Vilkul, the head of the Kryvyi Rih military administration, said in a post on Telegram that 112 homes had been flooded but that work to repair the dam was under way and that “flooding was receding”. However, a separate Russian missile hit another part of the city later in the day, suggesting a continued assault. The missile struck an industrial site in the city, an official said. The strikes on the dam had caused “extensive flooding” in areas of the city, after the river rose an estimated 2.5 metres, the Institute for the Study of War said. The Russian attack was probably intended to damage Ukrainian pontoon bridges further downstream as part of efforts to disrupt the Kherson counteroffensive, it said.\nVideo posted online showed elevated water levels on the Inhulets and flooded city streets, amid calls for the evacuation of residents. Switching to speak in Russian, Zelenskiy said: “Your missile attacks today, Russian missiles targeting Kryvyi Rih, the dam of the Karachunivske reservoir, the objects that have no military value at all, in fact hitting hundreds of thousands of ordinary civilians, is another reason why Russia will lose … you are weaklings waging a war against civilians; scoundrels who, having fled the battlefield, are trying to do harm from somewhere far away.”\nZelenskiy’s address was released after news that the car in which the president was travelling had been involved in a crash in Kyiv. He was not seriously hurt, a spokesperson, Serhii Nykyforov, said. Nykyforov did not say when the crash occurred, but said the car Zelenskiy was in collided with a private vehicle in the Ukrainian capital on Wednesday night. “The president was examined by a doctor, no serious injuries were found,” he said in a Facebook post, adding that the accident would be investigated. He did not specify what injuries Zelenskiy might have sustained, if any. Medics accompanying Zelenskiy gave the driver of the private car emergency aid and put him in an ambulance, Nykyforov said.\nZelenskiy was returning to Kyiv on Wednesday from the Kharkiv region, where he had visited troops in the recaptured city of Izium. In his video address on Thursday, Zelenskiy spoke of the destruction found by Ukrainian forces in the Kharkiv region, saying evidence of torture and other abuses strengthened allegations of the genocide of Ukrainians, after similar abuses in Bucha, as well as the Chernihiv and Sumy regions. He said almost the entire region of Kharkiv had now been liberated by “an unprecedented movement of our warriors”. “Ukrainians once again managed to do what many considered impossible,” he said, adding that nearly 400 settlements had been retaken. “The 150,000 Ukrainians who remained in this territory feel again now what an ordinary, safe, normal life is like.” Agencies contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-15T15:08:39Z'}, {'id': '631fa02f8f08f46fd168d6d0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The final hurdle for any immigrant suffering through a bitter Canadian winter or swatting away hordes of summertime bugs is to pledge allegiance to a monarch thousands of kilometres away from the new country they call home. Queen Elizabeth II was well liked by generations of Canadians, but her death and the ascension of her son Charles have revived a longstanding debate in the country, where support for the monarchy is in steady decline. But unlike other states that have cut the link with the British crown – or are considering doing so – Canada is likely to remain tethered to the monarchy for no better reason than the convoluted rules that govern its constitution. Throughout Canada’s 155 years as a nation, a king or queen has served as head of state. Under Elizabeth, it was her favourite destination for a royal visit – of which there were 22 during her 70-year reign. “Thank you again for your welcome,” she told a rapt crowd in Halifax in 2010 on her final tour of the country. “It is very good to be home.”\nThe institution she represented, however, has increasingly fallen out of favour with Canadians, a majority of whom would prefer to see it abolished. For some, it’s stuffy and outdated. For others, it bears the weight of history, and the responsibility for centuries of suffering and dispossession of Indigenous peoples. Nowadays, immigration drives Canada’s population growth and with many new Canadians arriving from countries that also suffered under colonialism, scepticism of the monarchy is only likely to grow, said Jonathan Malloy, a professor of political science at Carleton University who specializes in the study of parliamentary institutions. But even so, the monarchy is likely to remain. “I’ve never really seen a serious discussion in Canada of exactly what steps would need to be taken to eliminate the crown and come up with a new sort of state structure,” said Malloy, pointing out that unlike other Commonwealth nations, Canada has never had a strong or “serious” republican movement.\n“What people don’t often realize is that the crown underlies everything: our legal and constitutional system, our parliamentary system. It’s everything,” said Malloy. “And to get rid of it isn’t as simple as severing the ties, or swapping ‘crown’ with ‘state’ in key documents.” Under the 1982 Constitution Act, in order to sever ties with the monarchy, Canada would need approval from the House of Commons and the Senate, as well as the unanimous consent of all 10 provinces. But that would be nearly impossible, as provinces would fear that changes to the constitution could mean surrendering powers to the federal government.\nCanadians also have vivid memories of a tumultuous period in the 1980s and 1990s that included two failed attempts to amend the constitution and a brush with separatism that left leaders wary of dramatic change. Any political leader looking to abolish the monarchy would need to stomach significant disorder and confusion, as well as a wave of competing visions for a reformed constitution. “Any ‘solution’ could cause more problems than it solves,” said Malloy. “In a way, people do recognize that the system – even though it is weird – does have its strengths and works.” Elizabeth’s death has come amid a larger reckoning over Canada’s past, its relationship to the crown and a legacy of colonial violence. After unmarked graves were discovered at the site of former residential schools more than a year ago, a harsh spotlight has been cast on Great Britain’s role in the country’s history. The grim discovery prompted a furious backlash – in which statues of Elizabeth and Queen Victoria were toppled by protesters – but also a sustained debate over the long shadow of the country’s colonial past. Niigaan Sinclair, a professor of Native studies at the University of Manitoba, said that Indigenous views towards Elizabeth were varied and nuanced. Many saw her as a matriarch, a strong woman who cared about and led her family and community – and thus lived by values Indigenous people cherish and respect. But simultaneously, the Queen presided over “the most genocidal policies in history”, said Sinclair. Indigenous leaders often pleaded with her during official visits to Canada to advocate on their behalf to the federal government. The Queen promised to act, but nothing ever came of it, said Sinclair. He pointed to her 1970 visit to Manitoba, when David Courchene, chief of the Manitoba Indian Brotherhood, asked the Queen why Canadians were so rich, while his people were so poor. Courchene asked if that disparity was a fulfilment of the treaties her ancestors had signed. Particular frustration has focused on the Queen’s perceived failure to intervene to prevent neglect and abuse in residential schools, Sinclair said.\n“She was extremely happy to use us for her public image. She had an opportunity to advocate in life-and-death situations and she didn’t do anything, so it’s hard to have a legacy of being proud of somebody like that,” said Sinclair. The relationship between Indigenous peoples and the British royal family predates Canada’s foundation as a country and is largely embodied in treaties signed in the 1700s. That long history means Indigenous views about the role of the sovereign in Canada are ambiguous and varied, said George Lafond, a former treaty commissioner for the province of Saskatchewan.\nAnd the relationship was further complicated when the Canadian government implemented the Indian Act in 1876, a sprawling piece of legislation that sharply restricted Indigenous autonomy. This move “pushed everything aside”, Lafond said, leaving First Nations to question the crown’s sincerity in its negotiations. “Why did the crown let that happen?” he said. Yet the Union Jack is still flown at powwows. “[My father] served the King and country, along with many other Indigenous men who fought for the symbols, language and culture of Britain,” said Lafond. “I have an obligation to his generation to respect what they did in their time.” Sara Mainville, a Toronto-based lawyer specialising in treaty implementation and governance, says the treaties her ancestors signed with the crown represent a statement of trust that both nations could live peacefully side by side – and undoing those could be “traumatic” for many nations. “These treaties are a spiritual agreement, something that was solemnized in ceremony. We smoked the pipe afterwards. It’s not something that can be renegotiated. It’s a living thing. We need to honour its existence, and feed it and nurture it,” she said. Decades of neglect by the federal government represent a failure of the state to uphold its obligations – not of the treaties themselves, she said. For Mainville, the 1764 Treaty at Niagara set the stage for how Indigenous nations saw their relationship to the crown – one of mutual aid and benefit. “I see the treaties as an opportunity for both nations to be successful. The Indigenous perspective of treaty making is it’s a win-win. So why are we suffering?” said Mainville, who also served as chief of Couchiching First Nation. “Because the honour and trust has been broken.” Mainville said if the relationship to the crown were to end, there was little trust among Indigenous nations that Canada’s federal or provincial governments, which have repeatedly failed in their duties, would negotiate new treaties that would hold Indigenous nations as peers. “The reality is, that’s just not going to happen.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T14:15:46Z'}, {'id': '632094ae8f08581537027b5f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The body was found in the shade of a mango tree: a man’s life cut short in a frenzy of stabbing – and a horrifying symbol of the political violence that has gripped Brazil under its rabble-rousing president, Jair Bolsonaro. “He showed no sign of remorse,” the police chief investigating the murder said of the prime suspect, a Bolsonaro-supporting lumberjack who allegedly committed the crime because he disliked the victim’s leftist views. The murder of Benedito Cardoso dos Santos, which took place last Wednesday near a remote Amazon town, has sent shock waves through South America’s most populous nation as it braces for its most important presidential election in decades on 2 October. Bolsonaro, a pro-gun former paratrooper notorious for his radical rhetoric, has not commented on the killing, which police say was the result of a political altercation involving one of his devotees. But Bolsonaro’s political opponents are convinced the toxic climate whipped up by the far-right populist lies behind the murder – and a series of other violent incidents which have taken place ahead of next month’s crunch vote. Within hours of last week’s murder Bolsonaro – who calls the election a battle between good and evil – demanded leftists be “eradicated from public life”. During the last election – when Bolsonaro himself was stabbed by a mentally ill lone wolf – he called for supporters of Lula’s Workers’ party to be “machine-gunned”. After winning power, Bolsonaro promised a cleanup of “red outlaws”. “The country is moving toward a savagery we have never before known,” the former leftist president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who looks poised to defeat Bolsonaro in October’s election, warned last week after the murder of his supporter.\nAlexandre Padilha, a key member of Lula’s campaign team and former minister, said he had no doubt Bolsonaro bore responsibility for the spate of violent incidents, which includes the fatal shooting of a member of Lula’s Workers’ party by a Bolsonarista and an attack on a Lula rally with an excrement-filled bomb. “Bolsonaro and Bolsonarismo encourage political violence with an intensity Brazil has never seen,” claimed Padilha, a congressman for São Paulo state. “Bolsonaro promotes hatred, he promotes the extermination of his adversaries and Bolsonaro has doled guns out all around the country,” Padilha added, noting how the number of privately owned weapons had soared to nearly 2m thanks to the president’s loosening of gun laws.\nLast weekend armed Bolsonaro supporters reportedly threatened two prominent leftwing politicians, Guilherme Boulos and the presidential candidate Ciro Gomes, while they were campaigning. “It was horrible … nobody was expecting it,” said Ediane Maria, a leftist politician who was handing out leaflets with Boulos when they were confronted by a visibly agitated man. “He said, ‘I’m Bolsonaro!’ and, jittery, he lifted up his shirt and showed that he was carrying a gun. You could see the grip,” Maria said. “These people have always existed … but Bolsonaro has given them a voice.” At a televised debate on Tuesday night, a pro-Bolsonaro politician was filmed harassing and insulting Vera Magalhães, a prominent female journalist whom Bolsonaro recently called “a disgrace to Brazilian journalism”.\nPadilha cited the recent murders of the British journalist and Guardian contributor Dom Phillips and the Indigenous expert Bruno Pereria as further examples of the “extremely serious [wave of] political violence” affecting Brazil. “Phillips advocated the protection of the Amazon and was denouncing illegal activities in the Amazon. Bolsonaro has turned the Amazon into a land without law,” he said. Police are still investigating what exactly happened in the lead-up to last Wednesday’s murder, near the Amazon town of Confresa in Mato Grosso state. Investigators believe the crime occurred after two lumberjacks – Cardoso dos Santos, 42, and Rafael Silva de Oliveira, 24 – went out for a post-dinner cigarette and ended up arguing over Brazil’s rancorous election race. “Benedito was championing the former president Lula. Rafael was championing President Bolsonaro – and they started to row,” said the local civil police chief, Victor Oliveira Pereira. What followed was a bloodbath, with Silva de Oliveira allegedly stabbing his victim at least 15 times in the neck and head before trying to decapitate him with an axe and filming the scene. The suspect confessed to the crime the next day after unsuccessfully trying to flee. “We live in a democratic state where people have the right to express their opinions. According to the constitution, political pluralism is one of the foundations of our country. If things go on like this, we will go backward as a society,” the police chief warned. “We cannot allow this to become commonplace. We must have the right to express our opinions without it ending in violence,” he added. Padilha said that at no point in his four decades in politics had he felt such aggression and hatred on the streets. “Brazil is living through a climate of political violence the likes of which we’ve not seen since the return of democracy … and more than merely a climate, we’re now seeing a concrete reality.”\nFears of a violent attack on Lula – which grew after the recent attempt to assassinate Argentina’s vice-president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner – are such that the former president has taken to wearing a bulletproof vest beneath his shirt at rallies. Padilha admitted politicians and activists were worried, but insisted they would not be frightened into withdrawing from campaign events. “We will face this political violence without hatred but without fear,” he said. Ediane Maria also vowed to continue her political struggle despite the threats. “We will not abandon the streets. These things only make us more determined … to fight so we can defeat Bolsonaro and he is gone from government on 2 October,” she said. “They will not intimidate us. We will continue to advance.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T00:25:37Z'}, {'id': '6310d61f8f08e826bf50212f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A hundred years after the rise of Italian fascism was heralded by Mussolini’s 1922 march on Rome, the country is on the verge of electing a party with its roots in neo-fascism. With just over a week to go until polling day, the smiling face of Giorgia Meloni, the leader of the Brothers of Italy, is emblazoned on thousands of posters from the heel in the south to the Alps in the north. When polls close on the evening of 25 September, Meloni is expected to emerge triumphant, making her Italy’s first far-right leader since the second world war. Meloni has always distanced herself from fascism and recently declared that the Italian right had “handed fascism over to history”. Her current political success owes much to her decision, unlike that of Matteo Salvini and his Northern League, to keep her party out of the outgoing prime minister, Mario Draghi’s, cross-party government. The move cemented her as an opposition voice and has given her the leading position in a rightwing electoral coalition, that includes the League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, now polling in excess of 45%. But she has been reluctant in campaigning to shed the political slogan Dio, Patria, Famiglia (God, Homeland, Family), widely used in the fascist era, and her party retains apparent fascist visual references. It shares its party logo, an Italian tricolour in the form of a flame, with the now defunct Italian Social Movement (MSI), a neo-fascist party formed in 1946 by supporters of Mussolini’s regime and former high-ranking members of his fascist party. Some supporters of her party have performed the fascist salute during public commemorations.\nHow can it be that Italy, which lived through Mussolini’s bloody regime and passed discriminatory laws against its Jewish citizens, is close to electing as prime minister the leader of a party with these associations, who in a recently surfaced video from 1996 said of the fascist leader: “Mussolini was a good politician. There have been no other politicians like him in the last 50 years”? Paolo Berizzi, of La Repubblica, has been asking such question for years. The journalist, who has written extensively about the extreme right in Italy, has received numerous threats from neo-fascist and neo-Nazi groups and now lives under police protection. “Italy is a country that never came to terms with its fascist past,” he said. “Fascists didn’t die in 1945; they’ve always been around.” To find some answers, one must go back to the immediate aftermath of the second world war, when the first issue for Italy to address was national unity. The toppling of Mussolini in 1943 was followed by bloody civil war between a Nazi-backed puppet state and the partisans of the Italian resistance, so when peace came to Europe, fears of aggravating civil tensions overrode the purging of fascists from Italian institutions and prosecuting them for war crimes. While the Nuremberg trials against prominent members of the Nazi party began in Germany in November 1946, Italy, in part concerned about growing numbers of communists, on the brink of the cold war, had from June of that year run an amnesty programme, releasing thousands of fascists from prison.\nMany took jobs in the postwar administrations: Ettore Messana, a fascist official whose name appears in a UN list for war crimes, was appointed inspector general for public safety in Sicily; Gen Giuseppe Pichè, who carried out counter-espionage for Mussolini, was nominated director general of the Civil Protection Agency. “After the war there were a lot of Italians who thought that, despite the conflict, Mussolini hadn’t done so badly after all,” said Salvatore Lupo, a professor of contemporary history at Palermo University. Giorgio Almirante, a culture minister in the Nazis’ short-lived puppet state, founded the MSI with former members of the Italian Fascist party in this climate of tolerance. By 1948, three neo-fascists sat in the Italian parliament. It is from this heritage that the Brothers of Italy would later emerge. The neo-fascist MSI, meanwhile, remained sidelined from mainstream politics until the early 1990s, when a nationwide judicial investigation into political corruption resulted in the disappearance of many traditional political parties and gave it an opportunity. Its members formed the National Alliance party in 1995, maintaining the tricolour flame as their symbol, and, presenting themselves as neoliberal conservatives, found in Berlusconi’s Forza Italia their first ally in national government.\nIt was Berlusconi who, during a political rally in 2019, boasted about having been the first to engage with neo-fascists. “The parties that governed Italy from the beginning of the First Republic had never allowed the fascists to enter the government”, he said. “We let them in for the first time. We legitimised them.” Berizzi said: “It was in those years that the criminal revisionism of fascism, as I call it, began, fuelled by talkshows and many newspapers. Fake news began to circulate around fascism, which still today is presented as a regime that ‘did many great things’.” Many Italians today are convinced that Mussolini introduced public housing in Italy, when in reality it had begun in 1903, nearly 20 years before his rule. The enduring cliche is that Mussolini made the trains run on time, but during the fascist period trains were chronically late. Unable to resolve the problem, the regime instead forbade people from discussing it, because to do so would be “dishonourable to the homeland”. More than 70 years after Mussolini’s death, thousands of Italians started to join self-described fascist groups in a surge of support antifascists blame on the portrayal of the refugee crisis, and Italy’s economic and political instability. In this context, in 2012 Brothers of Italy was founded, largely from the ranks of MSI and National Alliance. Two years later, Meloni, previously an activist in the MSI’s Youth Front, rose to become its leader. “Meloni became the leader of her party in a period in which fascism in Italy was almost normalised and getting popular among young people,” Berizzi said. “Statuettes of Mussolini and calendars of the Duce are on sale in kiosks and shops. The fascist salute […] has become an almost folkloric gesture.”\nAntonio Scurati, the author of M, an international bestseller about Mussolini’s rise to power, said: “While in Germany there was a long process of overcoming the past, which had as a prerequisite that of making all German people reflect on the co-responsibility of the crimes of nazism, in Italy this process has never taken place. Whenever we speak about the war and racial laws in Italy, we always identify ourselves with the role of victim and anti-fascists, and this has prevented us from admitting to ourselves that we were fascists.” Meloni has “unambiguously” condemned “the suppression of democracy and the ignominious anti-Jewish laws”, emphasising that her party has nothing to do with fascism and is a conservative champion of patriotism. She told Corriere della Sera after local elections there were no “nostalgic fascists, racists or antisemites in the Brothers of Italy DNA” and she had always got rid of “ambiguous people”. “Let’s believe that Meloni is not a fascist. Let’s believe that technically her party is not neo-fascist,” Berizzi said. “You still can’t deny that in her ranks there are numerous fascists […] If Meloni wins the election, fascism may not be back, but our democracy will be at risk.” Just as the far right is moving forward, some Italians have compared the current situation to a satire movie released in 2018, which imagines Mussolini returning to Italy and being acclaimed by people. “If Mussolini were to return, Italians would re-elect him,” Scurati said. “In fact, Italians, Europeans, North Americans and Brazilians have already elected several ‘neo’ Mussolinis.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-15T14:57:23Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Last night, a nail biting election in Sweden that went down to the last postal votes finally reached its conclusion: the Social Democrat prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, conceded defeat to a conservative bloc including the far-right Sweden Democrats (SD). Jimmie Akesson (above), the SD’s leader, said it was time to “make Sweden good again”. It was no landslide victory, the right wing coalition only won a majority of three out of 349 seats. And centre-right parties have said that the SD will not be given ministerial power. But the fact remains that a radical party which emerged from violent neo-Nazi groups in the 1980s is now the second-biggest grouping in Sweden’s parliament, and the largest on the right, with more than 20% of the vote. The SD have sought to move away from their ethno-nationalist past, instead portraying themselves as any other nationalist conservative party. They even changed their logo from a flaming torch with the Swedish flag emblazoned on it to a yellow and blue flower, because what indicates deradicalisation like a nice flower? But given the party’s history, and hardline stance on immigration and crime, their success has already caused real alarm. For today’s newsletter, I spoke to journalist and University of Glasgow sociology lecturer Dominic Hinde, a Sweden expert who has been travelling around the country since June, and David Crouch, who has been covering the election for the Guardian, about how Sweden got here. That’s after the headlines. Five big stories Queen Elizabeth II | Mourners have waited through the night to file past the Queen’s coffin as it lay in state, with vast queues across London of well wishers waiting to pay their final respects. On Wednesday, King Charles and other members of the royal family were part of a ceremonial procession from Buckingham Palace to Westminster Hall. Ukraine | Residents of Izium have spoken about their experiences of occupation, now that Ukrainian forces have recaptured the town. While Russian forces largely kept to themselves, locals spoke of people who were “disappeared” or killed in cold blood. A war crimes investigation is now underway. Politics | The new chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng’s sacking of senior Treasury official Tom Scholar will have a “chilling effect” on the advice civil servants give to ministers, a former head of the civil service has warned. Chris Kaba | The family of Chris Kaba will be allowed to watch police video of the incident that led to his killing, the Guardian has learned, as the police watchdog insisted evidence and not public pressure led it to investigate an officer for homicide offences. Coronavirus | The end of the Covid-19 pandemic is “in sight”, the World Health Organization has declared, after revealing that weekly deaths from the virus around the world were at the lowest level since March 2020. In depth: How a liberal Nordic nation changed course\nBefore their success forced the resignation of Magdalena Andersson (above) last night, the Sweden Democrats had been operating in the background of their country’s politics for more than three decades. But they have only entered the mainstream since 2018, when they won 17.6% of the vote – up from around 13% in 2014. With a few high-profile expulsions of neo-Nazi members alongside a wider rebranding effort, the party appears to have successfully persuaded many voters of its acceptability. It is not yet clear how the Sweden Democrats will work with the centre-right Moderates, Christian Democrats and Liberals who form the rest of the bloc. The Moderates may well lead a minority administration. Nonetheless, the size of the SD vote leaves them in a strong position to get concessions from the rest. The result shouldn’t be too surprising, said Crouch. “We’ve seen anti-immigrant far-right parties getting significant votes in Scandinavian countries,” he said. However, the neo-Nazi origins of the Sweden Democrats have made this result even more shocking to outsiders. How has a country that once favoured internationalism and a more open border policy welcomed hostile anti-immigration rhetoric? *** The political context There has been an “ongoing political crisis” in Sweden, said Hinde. The Social Democrats have governed in coalition, and over the last parliamentary term, they and their partners have been unable to pass any significant policies. The Sweden Democrats, alongside other rightwing parties, have capitalised on this stalemate to paint an image of the government as being a “leftwing coalition of chaos”, Hinde said. Over several years, the Sweden Democrats have successfully focused on anti-immigration and tough-on-crime policies. And that appears to have dragged mainstream parties to the right. In a speech in July, the leader of the centre-right Moderates Party, Ulf Kristersson, congratulated the Sweden Democrats for their foresight in opposing large-scale immigration. The Social Democrat prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, said that she doesn’t want Sweden to have “Somalitowns” or other ethnic clusters in Swedish cities. Less than a decade ago, the Sweden Democrats were political pariahs, and overtly praising them – much less entering into a coalition with them – would have been unheard of. As recently as 2015, the former prime minister and then-leader of the Moderate party, Fredrik Reinfeldt, referred to the Sweden Democrats leaders as “racists” and “stiffly xenophobic”. But since their significant vote gains in the 2018 election, the centre-right has seen that cooperation with the Sweden Democrats can get them back into power.\n*** A country in decline? So how did Sweden get here? While the country has long enjoyed an image as a prosperous society with a high standard of living, a strong social safety net, and a tradition of progressive values, many Swedish voters are frustrated and dissatisfied with the way the country is governed. To those people, the perception of their country no longer matches the reality: “There’s there’s been a massive decline in the quality of public services, Swedish healthcare is a shadow of what it used to be, and the education system is really suffering,” Hinde said. All of this has fed a narrative that the Sweden Democrats have been pushing of a country in decline. This sense of decline was heightened after the refugee crisis in 2015, when Sweden accepted a record high of more than 150,000 asylum seekers. That’s almost 1.5% of its overall population. As in other European countries, an initial welcome gave way to suspicion. In April, outgoing prime minister Andersson said she regretted that the government had allowed “parallel societies” to develop. A particularly intense sticking point has been this link between immigration and crime. Immigrants and refugees have been blamed for the increase in gun violence in the country’s suburbs by just about everyone. A high-profile shooting only a few weeks ago in a playground left a mother and child injured. Most of these shootings are related to gang activity, and while most of the victims are gang members, random people are sometimes caught in the crossfire. The Sweden Democrats have offered a simple cause of this unease and a solution: raise the drawbridge. These kinds of solutions may not be as straightforward as they seem: Crouch spoke to an academic criminologist earlier in this week about the link between immigration and violent crime, “and he said the numbers are so small that it’s very hard to draw any firm conclusions”. But the narrative from both the centre-left Social Democrats and the central-right Moderate party has fundamentally been the same as the Sweden Democrats: immigration is a problem. *** The international view With the Sweden Democrats gaining such influence, this election has already affected Sweden’s international image. The Moderates are doing damage control, Hinde said, “staging a big press operation to reassure allies in the international press that they’re the sensible guys in charge”. Sweden has a much larger cultural and political footprint than its size might be expected to dictate, and one of the reasons it’s maintained its place on the global stage is because of its progressive reputation. So, even though the Sweden Democrats are in a three-seat majority government, and have no ministerial power, they have managed to potentially put Sweden on a wildly different trajectory. “Sweden always registers very highly in these country indexes about best national brands, it’s got very good diplomatic reputations and a good human rights record,” Hinde said. “And this is integral to Swedish politics and how Swedes see themselves.” What else we’ve been reading Martin Scorsese, Mike Leigh, Abel Ferrara, Carol Morley, Luca Guadagnino, Claire Denis: the lineup of directors who contributed tributes to Jean-Luc Godard for this package is extraordinary. “If any artist can be said to have left traces of his own presence in his art, it’s Godard,” writes Scorsese. Archie For many, lawns are an innocuous feature of everyday life. But Giovanni Aloi spoke to the artists who have taken an ideological and environmental stand against lawns by rewilding public and private spaces. Nimo As many older people are forced back to work by rising bills, Lizzie Cernik has a fascinating piece on the over-65s joining the “great unretirement”. Archie Schools are strapped for cash, Lola Okolosie writes, and they are cutting school trips to stay afloat. This choice might seem an alternative to cutting staff, but these trips offer kids, particularly those from deprived backgrounds, a chance to experience things they otherwise may not have. Nimo Aditya Chakrabortty’s piece highlights the surreal gap between the trappings of the monarchy as Charles III’s accession takes place and the UK’s suddenly secondary cost of living crisis. Its victims “sink into the depths beneath any safety net”, he writes. “Meanwhile, others will float above the law of the land.” Archie Sport Football | Manchester City beat Borussia Dortmund in the Champions League, 2-1, after striker, Erling Haaland, secured their second goal in an acrobatic display. Meanwhile Rangers lost to Napoli and Chelsea drew with RB Salzburg. Tennis | Great Britain was defeated by the US in the Davis Cup after a decisive late night double finish. Joe Salisbury and Andy Murray lost 5-7, 6-4, 7-5. Running | The London and Boston marathons will include non-binary categories in their application forms for races next year, in an effort to promote inclusivity. The front pages\nThe Guardian this morning shows King Charles peering from behind his mother’s coffin as it is carried on a gun carriage to Westminster Hall. The lead story follows events in Ukraine “‘People disappeared’: Izium recalls horror of occupation”. “Nation’s turn to say farewell”, says the Telegraph, showing the coffin emplaced at Westminster. “She lies at peace as her people bid solemn farewells” says the Daily Mail, showing the scene from another angle. “The long goodbye” – that’s Thursday’s i while the Metro says “Our jewel, her crown” as it shows the procession to Westminster with the imperial state crown in place atop the coffin. “Your nation stands with you, ma’am” – the Express has a wide shot of proceedings inside Westminster Hall. “A nation pays its respects” says the Times; royals and dignitaries are shown standing to attention as the coffin is carried inside. “We share your pain” – the Sun shows Harry, William and their spouses at the lying in state, while using the same picture the Mirror says “Pride and the pain”. The ever-literal Financial Times has “Royal family escorts Queen in procession to Westminster Hall” – the picture shows exactly that – while its splash is “Kwarteng set to end cap on bankers’ bonuses”. Today in Focus\nIs Russia on the retreat in Ukraine? Ukrainian forces have launched a devastating counteroffensive in the past week, retaking Russian-held territory. Dan Sabbagh and Shaun Walker explain what it means for the war as the countries head into winter. Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nWhen Jay Jordan (pictured above) got out of prison in California in 2012, he had all kinds of plans for his future – but he was barred from every single industry he hoped to work in because of his criminal record. Now, after years of campaigning, he has succeeded in winning a reform that will allow millions of California residents to clear their criminal records and have a better chance of getting jobs, housing, or education. Jordan, 37, was jailed for seven years over a burglary aged 18 in which nobody was hurt, nothing was taken and he did not carry a gun. Like many Americans, his prospects after prison were stymied by laws mandating the disclosure of a wide range of arrest and conviction records. A bill that passed the state legislature last month because of his campaign will bring the most far-reaching reform of its kind in the US. Jordan told the Guardian’s Sam Levin that when the bill passed, he thought of his father’s stories of growing up in segregated Oklahoma: “He told me about finally being able to go to the other side of town legally; it felt like he was born again, like a weight lifted off his shoulders. That’s what I feel. So many of us have been waiting for this day – to be free.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-15T05:55:59Z'}, {'id': '6321ba9c8f085815370284d5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two international NGOs have asked French prosecutors and the UN to investigate the French state’s involvement in Egypt allegedly committing crimes against humanity in a secret military operation on the Egyptian-Libyan border. A 2021 leak appeared to show how French officers complained they were being asked to facilitate Egyptian airstrikes, codenamed Operation Sirli, on the Egyptian-Libyan border, even though the original counter-terrorism purpose had been subverted by the Egyptian military into taking out vehicles containing nothing more than contraband. Dozens are estimated to have been killed or injured. The story was first revealed by the French investigative site Disclose. The complaint was filed to the French national anti-terrorist prosecutor’s office, on behalf of the US-based NGOs Egyptians Abroad for Democracy and Codepink, on Monday, the UK-based barrister Haydee Dijkstal told the Guardian. The NGOs want the French judiciary to investigate French officials’ complicity in committing crimes against civilians by providing assistance to the Egyptian authorities through information, aerial surveillance and intelligence, and then not ending the assistance once it became clear Egypt was not using the information for counter-terrorism purposes, but instead to bomb alleged traffickers in drugs and contraband. The complaint claims “the targeted attacks that resulted in the systematic killing and wounding of civilians suspected of smuggling and unrelated to terrorism in (the Egyptian Western desert), constitute crimes against humanity”. The NGOs also referred the matter to three UN special rapporteurs to “take steps to obtain additional information on the targeted attacks, including through a visit to Egypt”. Operation Sirli was a now confirmed but then secret intelligence mission launched by France in February 2016 to secure Egypt’s porous 745-mile (1,200km) border with Libya and prevent any eventual terrorist threat. The initial deal, which was important to French efforts to cement relations with its security partner Egypt, was signed by the then French defence minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, but was known to successive French presidents. According to confidential defence documents the French military intelligence directorate (DRM) leaked in 2021, the Egyptian forces changed the original mission so that hundreds of vehicles were targeted by airstrikes causing countless deaths and injuries. The initial disclosure of the documents led to a French government inquiry, but the internal investigation turned into an examination of the source of the leak, and not what the leak disclosed. An attempt by leftwing deputies inside the national assembly to launch an inquiry by politicians foundered. The documents show French soldiers sent to Egypt between 2016 and 2019 alerted their superiors on four different occasions in military intelligence to the concern about the airstrikes against civilians accused of drug smuggling. One of the leaked emails said the French unit “remains very vigilant but nevertheless worried about the use made of [information] for [targeting] purposes”. Another email said the vehicles were linked with “simple Bedouin smuggling”. The strikes on hundreds of vehicles were carried out by Egyptian F-16s. The French defence ministry has defended the Sirli mission and clarified that it was “subject to a clear framework and strict preventive measures”. Le Drian acknowledged the security cooperation with the Egyptian authorities, while affirming that “the data exchange process is constructed in such a way that it cannot be used to guide strikes”. The complaint to the French prosecutor is intended to secure a reference for a magistrate to investigate the case, so ending what the NGOs describe as the impunity of those as yet unidentified but responsible in the French government over what amounts to a crime of torture. The reference to the three special UN rapporteurs operating in this field claims Egypt mounted attacks on individuals unrelated to terrorism, so violating their human rights, and requiring an investigation by the UN human rights council. Dijikstal said the location data collected by the French led to hundreds of people being killed and injured without any recourse to trial, and more recently their families had been deprived of any justice. “In the name of terrorism, ordinary people … were targeted.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T10:47:13Z'}, {'id': '63227bb38f0894b39b47f3de', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Increased spending on travel and leisure driven by eased Covid restrictions has helped helped New Zealand dodge recession, with its economy growing 1.7% in the quarter that ended in June. That growth reverses a 0.2% drop in GDP the previous quarter, and means the country escapes a “technical recession”, defined as two consecutive quarterly drops in GDP. The rise is mostly driven by a relaxation of the country’s Covid measures. With the reopening of borders and the lifting of internal restrictions, spending on air travel, accommodation, restaurants, bars, sports, recreation, and travel agency services all rose. The services sector, which makes up about two-thirds of the economy, was up 2.7%. Transport, postal, and warehousing were up 19.7%, driven by an increase in spending on air transport, Stats NZ said on Thursday.\nThe rise, while small, will be welcomed by the government, which has been battling falling support as New Zealanders struggle with mounting inflation and high cost of living. Finance minister Grant Robertson said the numbers indicated New Zealand was “well positioned to respond to the challenges ahead,” amid grim international economic forecasts. “The global economic outlook is being revised downwards as high inflation, the war in Ukraine and ongoing pandemic-related disruptions continue to affect the countries we trade with,” he said. “We are not immune to what happens beyond our borders, but we start on the front foot and with optimism.” New Zealand had a larger quarterly increase than a number of the countries it compares itself to. It was ahead of the OECD June quarter GDP rise of 0.4%, the United States’ 0.1% decline, and Australia’s rise of 0.9%. Opposition spokesperson Nicola Willis said the rise in GDP would not stop New Zealanders from feeling the heat of inflation, however, and said that on an annual basis the country’s economy had grown just 1% in the year to June, behind comparison countries like Australia. Stats NZ data showed that compared to the same quarter a year earlier, New Zealand’s growth was just 0.4 percentage points – well behind the OECD total of 3.7, Australia’s 3.6, or the UK’s 2.9. “While it is welcome that New Zealand has so far avoided a recession, weak growth comes as inflation remains at the highest rate in a generation,” Willis said. “In the year to August 31, food prices rose by 8.3 per cent, the highest in 13 years … most Kiwis are going backwards as their wages struggle to keep up with rising prices.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-15T02:57:31Z'}, {'id': '632200008f083917350c6cd7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Just weeks ago, Irina was working in the Russian occupation administration in Kupiansk, a large town in northern Ukraine that had been captured days after Vladimir Putin launched his war against the country. But then, as Russian troops fled the city and the Ukrainian army retook occupied territories in the country’s north, she and her family fled what they expected would be swift punishment for collaborating with the Russian invasion force. Evidence emerging from the newly retaken territories indicates that Russian troops regularly used violence to put down any local dissent and maintain control. At the same time, some have said they welcomed and helped the Russians. Others listened to the insistence by Moscow-installed officials that they were there to stay for ever and decided to cooperate or simply try to live quietly under Russian rule.\nFor Moscow’s local allies, the sudden retreat of the Russian forces, who ceded some villages and towns with little resistance, was a turnaround bordering on betrayal. “Everyone had told us we’re here now, we’re here, you have nothing to be afraid of,” said Irina, recalling promises from officials sent by Moscow. She had taken a job in the accounting department of the new local administration installed by Russia, she said. “Five days ago they were telling us they would never leave. And three days later we were under shelling ... And we don’t understand anything [about the offensive]. “We don’t understand what the point of this is then,” she said of the Russian military operation. For months, Russia told people in Ukraine’s occupied regions that it was there to stay. The rouble was introduced, retired people were told they would get Russian pensions, and pro-Russian residents were hired into the ranks of government workers. “The fact is obvious that Russia is never leaving,” said Andrei Turchak, a leader of Russia’s governing United Russia party, during a visit to Kupiansk in July. “Russia will never leave here. And all the necessary aid will be provided.” That vow, along with the threat of violence, was crucial to project Moscow’s power into the towns and villages of Ukraine by ensuring willing locals that they would never have to face punishment as traitors or collaborators.\nNow Russia’s retreat has dealt a devastating blow to the image of the Russian armed forces and the Kremlin among some of their most willing supporters in Ukraine.\nUkraine has vowed to catch locals who collaborated with the Russian army or cooperated with Russian-installed governments. Cases can carry a prison sentence of up to 15 years. President Volodymyr Zelensky said on Wednesday that Ukrainian forces were seeking to root out “remnants of occupiers and sabotage groups” in the reclaimed towns and villages of the Kharkiv region. In Belgorod, a Russian region that borders Kharkiv, the governor’s office has said nearly 1,400 people are housed at a temporary camp after crossing the border from Ukraine. Many are families with children who have fled fighting. Hundreds more people are likely staying in rented apartments or with relatives. At a small aid distribution centre in the city, a half-dozen Ukrainians who had recently fled to Russia said they were dumbfounded by Moscow’s inability to hold on to the Kharkiv region and withstand the successful Ukrainian counteroffensive that has retaken 8,000 sq km (3,100 sq miles) of territory in just several weeks. “People there believed the Russian troops, they said we won’t leave you, that we lost so many people and we won’t leave you,” said Alexander, 44, who fled from a nearby village with his wife and son. “Then they suddenly retreated. They took several months to gather all this territory and then they abandoned it in two days. They don’t understand what happened.” Alexander, a trained pipe welder, said that he had not worked for Russia and hadn’t been employed since the war began. He had wanted to leave his village, which quickly fell to Russia in the early days of the war, because he “didn’t have either work or a school, and I need to dress my child and send him to school”. They had planned to join a brother in Poland, but then Alexander was wounded by a shell, and they fled to stay with a relative in Russia instead.\nThey left, he said, not because they opposed a return to Ukrainian rule, but because of the danger from the war. “It was driving us to hysteria,” he said. “We took it for as long as we could.” Like others, he asked not to be identified by his last name. He feared he could be seen as a traitor for having fled to Russia. He said he still hoped to return home to visit his parents in Ukraine. Moscow’s efforts to integrate the territories by publicly offering handouts while enforcing a culture of fear in occupied Ukraine was seen as a prelude to a formal annexation that could be held in some regions as soon as this autumn. But the lack of security signalled by Russia’s sudden retreat has also shaken the trust that some had and makes that more difficult in the territories that Moscow continues to hold. “We should have left earlier,” said Sergei, Irina’s boyfriend, who worked on the local railway. It was now difficult to find any place to stay in Belgorod, he said, where thousands of people have moved since the beginning of the war. Irina and Sergei both said they still supported Russia in the war but had less faith that it could protect supporters in Ukraine. “Now I’m worried for people in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia,” said Irina, referring to the regions in southern Ukraine also occupied by Russia. “They’re also being told ‘We’re not going to leave.’ But if you look at what happened near Kharkiv, then no one can say what’s going to happen tomorrow.”\nBy many accounts, Russian troops themselves and some of the Kremlin’s top boosters have come out saying that Russia is in danger of losing its supporters in occupied Ukraine. “People here are waiting for us to get started,” said Alexander Sladkov, a Russian war correspondent, in a televised report. “For us to hit them so hard that they end up on their backsides. That’s to say a knockout. It’s very difficult to win on points. We’re losing a huge number of people, we have wounded.” Catching himself, he added: “And we have great successes.” Russia has not had much success lately. And its troubles may grow further as towns that have been held by Russia since the first weeks of the war begin to emerge from isolation and tell stories of life under occupation. It also set off an exodus of people for the border. Earlier this week, Yulia Nemchinova, a local activist who delivers aid to Ukrainian refugees in Russia, filmed a video of some of the hundreds of cars that had fled from Kharkiv region at the Russian border. A Ukrainian official described one such convoy from the Luhansk region as collaborators “packing their loot, packing their families, and leaving”. Nemchinova, who has pro-Russian views, confirmed that many inside feared being labelled as collaborators, although she described them as locals who she said were “just trying to live”. “People were told that Russia is here for ever,” she said. “They were in shock. People were just black. They were literally the colour black. I asked people where are they going, they said: to Russia. Just nowhere. Just to cross the border.” At the aid centre, most said they would only return to Ukraine if Russia retook the territory. Others said they would never return at all, even if Russia returns. “We’ll never go back,” said Sergei, Irina’s boyfriend, who was carrying a small bag with shoes and sweaters from the aid centre. “There’s nothing for us to go back to.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-15T11:59:52Z'}, {'id': '632207638f0892ec9e8cde77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The leader of Sweden’s incumbent Social Democrats has resigned as prime minister after conceding defeat in the country’s knife-edge election, handing victory to a loose bloc of rightwing parties that includes the far-right Sweden Democrats (SD). The PM, Magdalena Andersson, called a press conference at which she accepted defeat, while pointing out that her Social Democrats remained Sweden’s largest party with more than 30% of the vote – and that the majority in parliament for the right bloc was very slim. When postal votes and those of citizens living abroad were counted on Wednesday, a loose coalition of the SD and the three centre-right parties edged ahead to win a majority of three in the parliament of 349 seats.\nThere is no formal agreement between the SD and the Moderates, Christian Democrats and Liberals about how they will govern together, although the centre-right parties have said they will not countenance ministerial positions for the far right. However, the SD’s strong showing, making it Sweden’s second-largest party – and the largest on the right with more than 20% of the poll – puts it in a strong position to extract concessions in return for its support in parliament. Andersson, the Social Democrats party leader, noted that it was a “narrow majority, but a majority nonetheless”. “So tomorrow I will hand in my resignation as prime minister, and the responsibility for the continued process will go to the speaker,” Andersson said. “Now the work begins to make Sweden good again,” the SD leader, Jimmie Åkesson, wrote on Facebook. “We have had enough of failed social democratic policies that for eight years have continued to lead the country in the wrong direction. It is time to start rebuilding security, welfare and cohesion. It is time to put Sweden first,” he wrote. Ulf Kristersson, whose Moderate party came third with 19% of the poll and who is now in line to become the new prime minister, thanked voters for their trust and said: “Now we will have order in Sweden.” The final tally showed that the right bloc won 49.6% of votes, while the left bloc secured 48.9%. Given the closeness of the vote and the uncertainty over the final outcome, all the parties had refrained from making statements about a possible new government since polling stations closed on Sunday night. However, some of the key battlegrounds for a future rightwing coalition government with SD influence have already become clear. Swedish television’s flagship news magazine on Tuesday night aired a short interview with the head of the Swedish Committee Against Antisemitism, who expressed concern that the result might encourage racists and repeated earlier accusations that the SD are ambiguous over whether Jews can be Swedes. Björn Söder, formerly party secretary for the SD and a central figure in the party’s leadership, subsequently accused the broadcaster of bias and propaganda and demanded that public service broadcasting should be “fundamentally reformed”. A former Moderate party MP compared public service to “a cancerous tumour” in a tweet. The narrow majority enjoyed by the right, however, promises to make any future government fragile and vulnerable to individual parliamentarians voting with their conscience. One Liberal party MP already on Wednesday promised to try to bring down a government with SD involvement if the final result confirmed her election to parliament. “I went to the polls to defend human rights and freedoms,” Romina Pourmokhtari told Swedish media. “That is where we Liberals will have to aim our fire in the coming years.” After emerging from among Sweden’s violent neo-Nazi groups in the late 1980s, the Sweden Democrats have made strenuous and repeated efforts to exclude racists and extremists from their ranks and present themselves as a socially conservative party aiming to defend Swedish national traditions and culture. But a halt to immigration from non-European countries is a central plank of the party’s politics and key to its electoral success. The SD’s stated policy of “open Swedishness” holds that anybody can become Swedish if they learn the language and adopt the culture, but the notion of a Swedish Muslim appears to lie outside this approach, researchers say.\nSweden has become one of Europe’s most ethnically mixed nations since large-scale asylum-based immigration first began in the 1990s and accelerated sharply following the collapse of the Arab spring. For many years, the SD stood alone as the only party opposing immigration, which the party links to the recent rise of gun and gang criminality among youths who are children of immigrants in Swedish cities. “This is a historic moment, an era has come to an end,” said Jonas Hinnfors, a politics professor at Gothenburg University. “We don’t yet know the magnitude of the change to come, but for the past 50 or 60 years there has been a steady development towards broadly social liberal values, individual freedoms and minority rights, to which both left and right have contributed. “Whatever happens now, depending on the extent that the SD will be able to exert influence, that development has probably come to an end and we will see a rolling back of some of the things we have taken for granted.” There was likely to be a new approach to the media, more money for law and order, and a period where Swedishness and loyalty to Swedish values defined from above would be of central importance and would permeate school and university courses, libraries, culture, and the civil service, Hinnfors said. “The direction is clear.” • This article was amended on 19 September 2022 to refer to children of immigrants in line with our style guide.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T11:36:08Z'}]}