{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Covid is not going to go away’: Australia will require public health measures for foreseeable future, say experts', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-22T20:00:21Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/23/covid-is-not-going-to-go-away-australia-will-require-public-health-measures-for-foreseeable-future-say-experts', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Omicron variant', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/omicron'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Health', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health'}, {'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Infectious diseases', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/science/infectiousdiseases'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vaccines and immunisation', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/vaccines'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Melissa Davey', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/melissa-davey'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-news'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '62d8bf9a8f0883b6bb6b12ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In May 2021, Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, described how Covid vaccines were our “ticket out of the pandemic”. Vaccination, he said, would give Australians “a life with more certainty”. More than one year later, Australia’s Covid-19 vaccination rate is among the highest in the world. Yet daily deaths from the virus remain in the double-digits. Hospitals are overwhelmed, aged care homes and the most vulnerable are struggling with outbreaks, and there is again debate about whether more social restrictions, including mask mandates, are needed to curb virus spread.\nInfectious diseases expert and director of the Doherty Institute, Prof Sharon Lewin, said: “Last year, I definitely did not think we would be in this position.” “I definitely thought that with very high vaccination rates and what we knew about Covid vaccination and protection against disease from other variants, it would put us in very good stead. “But I think what we’ve learned, especially over the last four-to-six weeks here in Australia, is the virus really does have a lot of new tricks that were unanticipated.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nIts latest trick is Omicron, a variant that has produced the subvariants BA.4 and BA.5, which are now dominating new infections in most parts of the world. These variants are immune evasive; whether that immunity comes from vaccination, or infection from other variants and subvariants. They are also highly infectious; between 10-to-20 times more so, Lewin says, than the original strain first identified in Wuhan, China, in late 2019. “BA.4 and BA.5 are so infectious, that those infections are very hard to control because they are just so large in number,” she said. “The infectiousness of Omicron and the limited capacity for vaccines to protect against infection [though they do protect against severe disease and death], means you’ve got high case numbers, which has a big impact on how society functions. This includes the impact on the healthcare workforce, on our transport workforce, and all the sorts of industries we need just to run the country. “Even if it’s just a very small percentage of those that end up in hospital, it’s still a large number overall, and the same is true with regard to long Covid which may potentially gives us a big burden of disease over time. “It’s this evolution of the virus in this way which has surprised virologists, evolutionary biologists, and vaccinologists.” ‘We should expect more variants’ Part of the reason variants like Omicron emerged so rapidly is because of the uncontrolled spread of the virus in vulnerable populations. People with weakened immune systems are more likely to remain infected with Covid-19 for several weeks or months, increasing the virus’s opportunity to mutate.\nThese prolonged infections have been seen particularly in patients with advanced, untreated HIV – a serious problem in sub-Saharan Africa, where the Omicron variant was first detected in November, thanks to the continent’s strong surveillance systems. In an opinion piece for Nature magazine, researchers argued that vaccine equity – along with access to treatment for HIV in Africa and curbing stigma – could help the world see fewer Covid variants emerge. In January 2021, WHO director general Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus warned “the world is on the brink of a catastrophic moral failure – and the price of this failure will be paid with lives and livelihoods in the world’s poorest countries”.\nHe expressed concern that high-income countries were acquiring the bulk of vaccines, while other countries were being left behind. “Not only does this me-first approach leave the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people at risk, it’s also self-defeating,” he said. “Ultimately, these actions will only prolong the pandemic, the restrictions needed to contain it, and human and economic suffering.” Prof Penny Moore, a virologist with the National Institute for Communicable Diseases in South Africa, said it is not just a lack of protection for vulnerable immunocompromised people – many of whom don’t even realise they’ve been infected with Covid because they’re asymptomatic – and a lack of equitable access to healthcare including vaccines, and antivirals for HIV and Covid-19 that are a problem in her country.\n“We need to deal with vaccine hesitancy,” she told attenders at a meeting of prominent infectious diseases experts in Sydney on Thursday, held by the Australasian Society for HIV, Viral Hepatitis and Sexual Health Medicine. “This is a new thing for us, we’ve never had this problem before and we certainly have it now. We simply can’t get people to take vaccines for Sars-CoV-2 [Covid-19] and that’s something we need to address. “On the African continent, we do not make vaccines. That has contributed massively to the fact that we don’t have vaccines to roll out against Sars-CoV-2 and many other [diseases]. We need to deal with that as a global community.” Until such problems are addressed, expecting more variants “is a no-brainer,” Moore said. “Yes, we should expect more variants, unfortunately. We’re certainly going to pick up these new variants when we continue to have this high level of community spread.”\nLewin said this reality means Australians will need to accept periodically returning to public health measures such as social distancing and masks as a way of life for the foreseeable future. “I am not saying we need masks forever, but when infections become large we need a rapid response,” she said. “We need to remove the emotion from mask-wearing. I was just in Singapore and Korea and everyone was wearing a mask and it was no big deal. Those countries were bursting with activity, but people were wearing masks all the time. We need to recognise it’s needed, just when we have surging numbers.”\nAustralia is also not effectively using the tools at its disposal, like vaccine boosters, and antivirals that protect the immunocompromised and elderly from becoming severely unwell and dying, she said. “We will also get better tools, there’s no doubt about it,” she said. “We will get better vaccines. We will get better antivirals. We will see improvements in the way we manage Covid, so I don’t think it’s all doom and gloom at all.” But the future of the pandemic is more uncertain than it seemed even months ago, she said. “I probably would have been more confident trying to make a prediction at the end of last year about what might happen, but now it’s very hard to predict,” Lewin said. “What is certain is Covid is not going to go away. We will have it next winter, and it will be here next year. “We need to plan for the worst, and hope for the best.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T07:35:31Z'}, {'id': '62d60b0f8f08f134b15fff4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'From small tribes in the remote Pacific islands to the teeming cities of China, humans share the common language of baby talk – but new research has discovered that Wellington, New Zealand, is the global capital of cooing. An international study, published in Nature Human Behaviour, collected 1615 recordings of 410 people from 21 societies speaking and singing to an adult and then a baby in more than a dozen languages. The researchers analysed the shift in tones using audio equipment and with the help of more than 50,000 people from 187 countries, who listened to the recordings and guessed if the person was speaking to an infant or an adult. Participants listened to vocalisations drawn at random from the group of recordings and then viewed the prompt: “Someone is speaking or singing. Who do you think they are singing or speaking to?” They could respond with either “adult” or “baby”.\nThe study found participants’ ability to tell when someone was speaking to a baby was higher than chance, even when the recordings were from a completely different linguistic family. However, baby talk in some societies was more easily recognisable than in others. People from Wellington, New Zealand, cooed at a particularly high register, making their baby talk the easiest to distinguish from adult-directed speech. Prof Quentin Atkinson, a University of Auckland psychologist and one of 43 co-authors of the study, said the project was designed to investigate whether patterns or shifts in the way people speak to infants were present only in western cultures or if they were universal – and if so, do the patterns shift in the same way? “The [western] assumption that because we speak differently to kids, everyone will, needed testing,” he said.\nThe study’s findings suggested that people do indeed alter their voices when they are singing or speaking to infants in a way that is consistent across cultures, and that this is a common, evolved function in humans – and one that other humans can recognise. Despite variability in language, music, and infant-care practices worldwide, when people speak or sing to infants, they modify the acoustic features of their vocalisations in similar and mutually intelligible ways across cultures, the study found.\n“Even people in the most distantly related cultures, people from entirely different language families … are able to differentiate between adult and infant-directed songs [and speech],” Atkinson said. This supported the researchers’ hypothesis that changing your pitch to speak to an infant is a functional tool, similar to the vocal signals many non-human species use to indicate friendliness or alarm and aggression. Adults adopted more intense and contrasting speech – for example higher pitch and longer pauses – when speaking to an infant, which is more attention grabbing and better to distract an unsettled baby, or facilitates language learning; while songs directed at babies became more subdued and soothing.\nThe study aimed to gather recordings from diverse societies with varying degrees of isolation from global media, including four small-scale societies that lack access to television, radio or the internet. That was important for ensuring the patterns had not been influenced by other cultures, Atkinson said. Atkinson could not pinpoint why Wellington residents speak baby talk more than most, and mused that “maybe Wellingtonians just go particularly gaga over babies?”\nAt the other end of the baby-talk spectrum to Wellingtonians – whose recordings were done by co-authors Alia Martin and Mary Beth Neff at the VUW Infant Cognition Lab – were Tannese Ni-Vanuatu people, from Vanuatu, who had a smaller shift in pitch. Atkinson, who has spent time with the Tannese Ni-Vanuatu as a researcher, theorised that their more hands-off style of parenting could be linked to smaller “instructive” shifts in intonation. “Interestingly, there is other work to suggest that … they don’t go out of their way in terms of active teaching, it’s more passive.”\nThe findings did not mean that infant-directed speech or song sounded the same across cultures, but rather that the shifts in tone were common or regular enough to be recognisable. The study is a tool towards understanding language development, Atkinson said. “[The fact that] all over the world people speak in a certain way to infants could be really important – perhaps the way we are talking to them is crucial to learning language.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T23:29:07Z'}, {'id': '62d880958f08d02cb60efd00', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The unwelcome news that New Zealand’s inflation rate has hit a 30-year high of 7.3% has confirmed what most of us knew all too well: the country is in a cost of living crisis, where essential everyday items are becoming increasingly unaffordable. Some, particularly the National opposition, argue that the government isn’t doing enough to halt price rises. On the face of it, that’s true enough. The recent pause on the fuel excise tax, for example, didn’t stop gas prices from rising. But hidden within that example is the chief cause of inflation – corporate super profit-making. This week Newsroom’s Jonathan Milne revealed the fuel retailers were pocketing an unprecedented $0.64 margin on a litre of diesel. Petrol prices were up 36% year on year, even as the government’s pause on the excise tax removed (or should have removed, if the retailers passed on the savings) 25 cents a litre. Almost as soon as this scandal was made public, the major retailers dropped their prices, with some going below $2.99 a litre – a move that seemingly confirms a profit rort was taking place.\nThis went public at the same time as First Union revealed that in the year to March, corporate profits had increased an impressive 39%. In dollar terms that means the owners of capital banked an extra $20bn in profit – a tidy sum in tight times. According to First Union researcher and policy analyst Ed Miller, that $20bn is “the biggest increase that we’ve ever seen, both in terms of the raw dollars – whether that’s inflation-adjusted dollars or non-inflation-adjusted dollars – and it’s also the biggest percentage increase that we’ve seen, ever”. The equivalent figure for working people, though, was significantly lower, with New Zealand’s total wage bill increasing only $12b. Considering these figures, where profit is increasing faster than wages, who should bear the burden of inflation? Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nThis – as Clint Smith, a former Labour party staffer, points out – is the proper question. Non-tradable inflation, which measures domestic prices like construction, is up only 6.3%, while tradable inflation, which measures imported inflation like the cost of gas, is up 8.7%. There is very little New Zealand can do about the price of imported goods, and domestic inflation in sectors such as construction can largely be a consequence of imported goods.\nThe unpalatable figures pose some tough questions for both those who now lead New Zealand and those who would. The government has answered them as any Labour government should. Working people receive more support. Last year the government lifted benefits, this year it’s releasing a cost of living payment for middle-income earners and, come November, the workplace relations minister, Michael Wood, plans to implement fair pay agreements (FPAs). These agreements would lift the wage floor in industries like supermarkets and security from, in most cases, the minimum wage to conceivably something closer to the living wage. A full-time worker whose FPA takes their pay from the minimum wage to the living wage would be paid an extra $98 each week. But how would the opposition distribute the burden of inflation? Well, they would take almost the opposite approach, prioritising enormous tax cuts for CEOs and tax breaks for landlords. It seems moderately pathetic that, almost eight months into Chris Luxon’s leadership of the National party, the best idea he can summon is welfare for the wealthiest New Zealanders. That is, tax cuts. Under the opposition’s plans the top tax rate – 39% on money earned over $180,000 – and the bright-line test, an effective capital gains tax on properties sold within 10 years, would go while interest deductibility, where property speculators can deduct interest from their taxes, would return. In the heat and light of Covid-19, a global pandemic exposing just how fragile middle-class living standards really are, and the war in Ukraine (an invasion disrupting food and fuel supply chains across the world), a tax cut in one of the most lightly taxed nations on earth seems silly.\nThis is especially so considering New Zealand’s housing crisis and its infrastructure deficit. In March the Treasury warned that the government faces a $210bn bill to build the infrastructure the country needs. In May the finance minister, Grant Robertson, committed $57bn to infrastructure over four years. This is obviously good, but it’s equally obvious that that figure – $57bn toward a $210bn deficit – isn’t good enough. How, then, would Luxon – whose plan to cut the top tax rate would gift $2b from the total tax take and return it to the CEOs – continue closing the infrastructure deficit? At the same time the opposition criticises the top tax rate (and the bright-line test etc) they criticise debt, so presumably borrowing to fund urgent development is off the table. That leaves cuts to services which, as you can imagine, Luxon leaves deliberately vague, offering examples of spending that amount to rounding errors – like the Hamilton-to-Auckland train service – as items that his government would cut. National’s plans seem particularly ill-advised when the owners of capital are doing so much better than working people. It also seems ill-advised when the rich can better bear the burden of inflation. The CEO who is paid over $180,000 hardly needs to forgo basics in the way that a minimum-wage or middle-income family would have to. But when you’re a former CEO leading the party of CEOs – that is, National – you’re likely blind to how low- and middle-income earners live. Until Luxon can fix that blindspot, he doesn’t have the answers to inflation – or the merit to win the next election.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T00:30:25Z'}, {'id': '62da8f4b8f0856861af45381', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The agreement to move Ukraine’s grain may have been signed, but the challenge of moving millions of tonnes from blockaded Black Sea ports is only just beginning. On Friday, Ukraine and Russia signed a UN-backed deal to allow Ukraine’s wheat, maize and oilseeds to be shipped amid fears over a global food crisis. But finding vessels and crew available to transport these cargoes is no overnight job. Shipping companies, as well as grain traders, have welcomed the deal as a positive step, but warned that several obstacles remain, including ensuring the safety of seafarers and vessels, along with securing adequate and affordable insurance to cover the transport. As a first step, Ukraine’s coastal waters will need to be de-mined, or at the very least a corridor stretching several kilometres will need to be cleared. There have been mixed reports from Kyiv over how long this would take, with estimates ranging from 10 days to several months. An armada of 400 bulk cargo ships – designed for transporting agricultural goods between continents and each able to hold up to 50,000 tonnes – would be required for transporting the estimated 20m tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine’s stores. Shipping analysts estimate it would take a couple of weeks for vessels to be re-routed to the Black Sea. This depends on the availability of ships in nearby areas, such as the Mediterranean, according to Peter Sand, chief analyst at freight market analytics firm Xeneta.\nMore than 100 ships have been unable to leave Ukraine’s ports since the start of the conflict, the majority of which are thought to be bulk cargo vessels. However these may not be immediately able to set sail, according to Guy Platten, the secretary general of the International Chamber of Shipping. “The ships have essentially been stopped since 24 February, so we’ve got to make sure that they’re seaworthy,” Platten said. “We’ve got to make sure the right crew are on board because a lot of the crews have been evacuated.” About 2,000 seafarers were onboard ships anchored in Ukraine’s ports when the invasion began, and the shipping industry has worked to repatriate them over the past few months, leaving behind just a skeleton staff of about 450 crew. It is unclear whether Ukraine would be able to provide sufficient numbers of seafarers who are not involved in the conflict to staff the grain flotilla. Before the war, Russians and Ukrainians represented around a fifth of all crew members. Once vessels and crew have been secured, vessel owners will need to obtain adequate “war insurance” to cover ship and crew, which will undoubtedly come with higher premiums attached. Even then, shipowners may be reluctant to send their assets and people to undertake this kind of mission, despite international guarantees. Getting all these things in place will take time, and the clock is ticking. Ukrainian farmers are due to begin harvesting their spring crops, and space needs to be freed up inside the country’s grain silos.\nDuring the blockade of Ukraine’s Black Sea ports, government officials and agricultural producers have been working to ramp up the levels of grain exports using road, rail and river transport. Those exports hit a new record of 2.3m tonnes in June, according to the International Grains Council (IGC), an intergovernmental organisation that seeks to promote cooperation in the global grain trade. However, this represents just a third of the amount which was exported each month by sea before the war. To secure sufficient space in its grain silos for the new harvest, Ukraine needs to move 7m tonnes of grain a month out of its stores over the next three months, according to the IGC. Alexander Karavaytsev, senior economist at the IGC, said: “It may be a very challenging task to start transporting 5m tonnes in the first month after reopening. In our view, even if the ports are reopened, there will be still need for additional storage such as building new silos.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T17:24:10Z'}, {'id': '62da7b298f0856861af45234', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine and Russia have signed a UN-backed deal to allow the export of millions of tonnes of grain from blockaded Black Sea ports, potentially averting the threat of a catastrophic global food crisis. A signing ceremony at Dolmabahçe Palace in Istanbul was attended by the UN secretary general, António Guterres, and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, who had played a key role during months of tense negotiations. Guterres said in remarks at the ceremony that the deal would open the way to significant volumes of food exports from Ukraine and alleviate a food and economic crisis in the developing world. He said “the beacon of hope was shining bright in the Black Sea” and called on Russia and Ukraine to fully implement the accord. In Kyiv, there is deep scepticism about Russia’s intentions but Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Ukraine was trusting in the UN and Turkey to police the agreement. The aim of the deal is to secure the passage of grain and essential goods such as sunflower oil from three Ukrainian ports, including Odesa, even as the war continues to rage elsewhere in the country. The UN had warned that the war risked mass malnutrition, hunger and famine. The arrangement also seeks to guarantee the safe passage of Russian-made fertiliser products, essential for ensuring future high yields on crops, amid efforts to ease a global food crisis provoked by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. UN officials said they hoped preliminary shipments of grain could begin as soon as Saturday, with the hope of reaching prewar levels of export from the three Ukrainian ports – a rate of 5m metric tonnes a month – within weeks. According to UN officials, under agreements signed by Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, and Ukrainian infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov: A coalition of Turkish, Ukrainian and UN staff will monitor the loading of grain on to vessels in Ukrainian ports before navigating a pre-planned route through the Black Sea, which remains heavily mined by Ukrainian and Russian forces. Ukrainian pilot vessels will guide commercial vessels transporting the grain in order to navigate the mined areas around the coastline using a map of safe channels provided by the Ukrainian side. The vessels will then cross the Black Sea towards Turkey’s Bosphorus strait while being closely monitored by a joint coordination centre in Istanbul, containing representatives from the UN, Ukraine, Russia and Turkey. Ships entering Ukraine will be inspected under the supervision of the same joint coordination centre to ensure they are not carrying weapons or items that could be used to attack the Ukrainian side. The Russian and Ukrainian sides have agreed to withhold attacks on any of the commercial vessels or ports engaged in the initiative to transport vital grain, while UN and Turkish monitors will be present in Ukrainian ports in order to demarcate areas protected by the accord. Guterres said brokering such a deal between two warring countries was “unprecedented” and that it would “bring relief for developing countries on the edge of bankruptcy and the most vulnerable people on the edge of famine”. “And it will help stabilise global food prices, which were already at record levels even before the war – a true nightmare for developing countries,” he added. “Specifically, the initiative we just signed opens a path for significant volumes of commercial food exports from three key Ukrainian ports in the Black Sea – Odesa, Chernomorsk and Yuzhny..” Kubrakov said the agreement was made possible thanks to the Ukrainian military’s defence of waters off Ukraine’s Black Sea coast. In June, Ukraine pushed Russian forces from Snake Island near Odesa. Ukraine claimed Russia had planned to use the island to launch a land invasion. The agreement would help boost the Ukrainian economy, he added. “More than 20m tons of grain have been in warehouses since last year,” he said. “If the president’s team did not manage to move this issue from a dead end, Ukrainian farmers would question the very need to sow fields for the next year.” The agreement is the product of months of constant and difficult negotiations between UN officials, including Guterres, and leading Russian and Ukrainian officials, who first broached the issue in April. US officials had accused the Russian government of effectively “weaponising food” by taking Ukrainian grain hostage in order to reduce the effects of sanctions on Russian exports. Still, the US and EU have both reassured businesses carrying Russian agricultural goods that they are not violating sanctions ahead of the signing of the deal. Senior UN officials said prior to the signing of the agreement that demining Ukraine’s coastline had not been seen as a viable option. Ukrainian officials expressed concerns that removing defensive mines from their coastline would increase their vulnerability to Russian attacks. But the final text contains provisions for a potential minesweeping operation by an agreed party to check that the maritime route for the ships remains safe, as well as a potential search and rescue vessel in the Black Sea.\nUN officials emphasised that the deal to prevent attacks only included specific areas in Ukraine’s ports covered by the grain agreement. They added that they had engaged with the shipping industry and insurers to ensure the commercial costs of insuring the grain shipments does not become punitive, thereby raising the cost of the grain on the international market. The details were finalised after Erdoğan met Russia’s president, , in Tehran earlier this week, officials in Ankara said. Turkey has the authority over sea traffic entering and leaving the Black Sea. İbrahim Kalın, a spokesperson for Erdoğan, said the arrangement would be “critical for global grain security”. Ukraine is the world’s fifth-largest wheat exporter but exports have badly stalled since the war began, with about 20m tonnes of grain stuck in silos at Odesa close to the frontline. The US state department said it welcomed the deal “in principle” and was focused on holding Russia accountable for implementing it. Putin effectively called the deal a quid-pro-quo earlier this week, saying that Russia would “facilitate the exportation of Ukrainian grain, but we are proceeding from the fact that all restrictions related to … the export of Russian grain will be lifted.” While Russian grain exports were not sanctioned by the US, some shipping companies have avoided carrying Russian goods because of the financial and reputations risks involved. Robert Mardini, director general of the International Committee of the Red Cross, said the deal was “nothing short of life-saving for people across the world who are struggling to feed their families”. “Nowhere are the consequences felt harder than in communities already affected by armed conflict and climate shocks”, he said. “For example, our market monitoring, over the past six months has seen the price of food staples rise by 187% in Sudan, 86% in Syria 60% in Yemen, 54% in Ethiopia, as compared to the same time period last year.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T16:58:27Z'}, {'id': '62dab7a58f08d0ef4fa8d0d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have shelled a school building in the eastern Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk, leaving three dead, according to Ukraine’s authorities. The school was destroyed in the attack, video footage shows, and 85 residential buildings were damaged, said Ukraine’s presidential office. The reported deaths come as Moscow’s forces edge towards the city, the de facto regional capital of Ukraine’s Donetsk region, after Russia’s proxy forces occupied half the region in 2014. “Russian strikes on schools and hospitals are very painful and reflect its true goal of reducing peaceful cities to ruins,” Donetsk’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said in televised remarks, repeating his call on residents to evacuate.\nOn Thursday, Ukraine’s second-largest city of Kharkiv was hit with a barrage of shells which killed at least three people and wounded 23 others. Russia’s ministry of defence called for its forces last week to step up their offensive to take Ukraine’s Donbas region, a term for the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Russian forces now occupy about 75% of the Donbas region. A spokesperson for Russia’s ministry of defence, Igor Konashenkov, claimed the attack on Kramatorsk had killed 300 Ukrainian soldiers using the school as their base. Konashenkov did not present evidence to back up his claim. It is unclear who died in the Kramatorsk attack. Ukrainian schools closed when the invasion began and children have been learning from home. Guardian journalists have seen evidence that Ukrainian forces use schools as bases. However, some schools visited by the Guardian had been repurposed for civilian purposes, such as humanitarian aid or social services. Russian forces made a similar claim after their attack in Chasiv Yar, a town just north of Kramatorsk in Donetsk region, where 48 people died. Russia said they killed “300 nationalists” in the attack. Guardian journalists who visited Chasiv Yar were told by residents that one of the residential buildings had housed Ukrainian soldiers but it was unclear how many had lived there. Local residents were also killed in the attack, including a nine-year-old boy.\nUkraine’s ministry of education said as of 2 June at least 1,888 schools and nurseries had been destroyed since the invasion. It has not provided an updated figure since then. In the Dnipro region of central Ukraine, three schools were destroyed in the latest Russian strikes, Ukrainian authorities said. Seven Russian missiles hit the small town of Apostolove in the Dnipro region, wounding 18 residents. Regional governor Valentyn Reznichenko decried the “senseless” attack, saying that “there are no military goals behind it and this shelling could only be explained by their desire to keep people on edge and sow panic and fear.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T16:10:23Z'}, {'id': '62da92ac8f08d0ef4fa8ced3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The number of Covid infections in England and Scotland is continuing to rise but the overall picture across all of the UK remains mixed, the latest data shows. A total of 3.1 million – or roughly one in 17 – people in England were likely to have had coronavirus in the week to 13 July. It represents a small increase on the figure of 2.9 million – or one in 19 – people the week before. Covid also remains prevalent in Scotland, where 340,900 people were estimated to have had the virus in the week to 14 July, or about one in 15. It is the highest estimate for Scotland since April.\nIn Wales, infections have plateaued at 183,200 or about one in 17 people, which is similar to 183,500 in the previous week. In Northern Ireland, infections have dropped to an estimated 88,400 people, or one in 20, down from 107,600, or one in 17. Kara Steel, the ONS senior statistician for the Covid Infection Survey, said: “Infections have, overall, continued to increase in England, reaching similar levels to those seen in April during the BA.2 wave. However, we are seeing some uncertain trends in the latest data across the other UK countries, some English regions and among some age groups.\n“It is too early to say if this most recent wave is starting to peak, but we will continue to closely monitor the data.” The combined data means 3.8 million people in private households in the UK were estimated to have had Covid in the week to 14 July, up 7% from 3.5 million the previous week. While hospital numbers appear to have levelled off, there have been calls for the return of infection control measures, including mask-wearing and better sick pay amid concern about rising cases and new variants. Prof Rowland Kao, the chair of veterinary epidemiology and data science at Edinburgh University, predicted “much more stressful conditions” in the autumn and winter and called for greater precautions.\n“Anything we can do to keep things down now is helpful,” Kao said. “I mean testing, isolating if positive, and being respectful of physical distance, particularly in high-risk settings. FFP2 masks in those settings would be a good idea, though that is also personal choice.” The current estimate is the highest for total infections since mid-April, but is still below the record high of 4.9 million seen at the peak of Omicron BA.2 wave at the end of March. The UK has endured three major waves of Covid since December. The first, driven by the original Omicron variant, BA.1 peaked in January but was swiftly followed by a second wave, fuelled by the Omicron subvariant, BA.2. The latest wave began in June with two descendants of BA.2, named BA.4 and BA.5, but of these, BA.5 is spreading fastest. According to a report on Friday from the UK Health Security Agency, the BA.5 variant is now dominant in England, accounting for 79% of cases. The figures come as polling suggests public concern about Covid has fallen to its lowest level since the start of the pandemic. Two-thirds of people surveyed said they were concerned about the risk coronavirus posed to the country, down from 71% in March, according to data compiled by the polling company Ipsos. Likewise, 56% of respondents said they were concerned about the risk the virus posed to people, down from 59%.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T08:58:05Z'}, {'id': '62dab68a8f0856861af4559f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations’ highest court has rejected Myanmar’s attempts to halt a case accusing it of genocide against the country’s Rohingya minority, paving the way for evidence of atrocities to be heard. The international court of justice rejected all preliminary objections raised by Myanmar, which is now ruled by a military junta, at a hearing on Friday. The case, which was filed by the Gambia, centres on brutal military crackdowns in 2016 and 2017 that forced more than 700,000 Rohingya to flee over the border to neighbouring Bangladesh. It accuses Myanmar’s military of carrying out widespread and systematic “clearance operations” against the Rohingya, committing mass murder, rape and torching villages, with the “intent to destroy the Rohingya as a group in whole or in part”. Myanmar had argued that the court did not have jurisdiction, claiming the Gambia could not bring the case because it was not directly affected by the events, and because a legal dispute did not exist between the two countries before the case was filed. It also claimed that the Gambia was acting as a “proxy” for the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and lacked standing because the ICJ only rules on disputes between states. Such arguments were each rejected by the court. Reading the decision, the court’s president, US Judge Joan E Donoghue, said: “The court notes that the Gambia instituted the present proceedings in its own name as a state party to the statute of the court and to the Genocide Convention.” Akila Radhakrishnan, president of the Global Justice Centre, said Friday’s decision was “an enormous step forward for justice”. “It sends a signal to Myanmar’s military that they cannot commit atrocities with impunity. The case proceeding is all the more important in light of the February 2021 coup, which was enabled and emboldened by the impunity the military has been afforded for far too long,” she said. The military seized power in a coup last year, and has unleashed a relentless campaign of violence to crush dissent. The UN rights office warned in March that the junta was carrying out widespread and systematic abuses against civilians that may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. Tun Khin, president of the Burmese Rohingya Organisation UK, said objections filed by Myanmar were an attempt to slow proceedings, and that oppression of Rohingya continues. “For a year and a half the case has been delayed and every day the genocide continues. Laws and policies designed to make life unbearable and drive Rohingya out of Myanmar are part of the genocide and continue despite provisional measures ordered by the court,” he said, referring to a previous court order instructing Myanmar to do all it can to protect Rohingya from genocide as the case, which will take years, proceeds. Tun Khin called on the UK to join the Gambia and back the case. “The UK claims international leadership on Myanmar but it’s Gambia, not the UK which has been leading,” he said. The Netherlands and Canada are supporting the Gambia. Following last year’s coup, the junta is now representing Myanmar at the ICJ. The national unity government, formed by elected lawmakers, ethnic minority representatives and activists, had argued it should represent Myanmar in court, and that it would withdraw preliminary objections.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T15:57:32Z'}, {'id': '62daa2778f0856861af45469', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An international reforestation company has said it is “devastated” after one of its contractors accidentally caused a massive fire in Spain, where dozens of calamitous wildfires have raged this week. Land Life, a Netherlands-based company with offices in Spain and the US, said the fire broke out on Monday at one of its reforestation projects in Ateca in the north-eastern region of Aragón. The company said the blaze, estimated to have damaged 14,000 hectares (34,600 acres) of land, was caused after a spark escaped from an excavator used by one of its contractors to prepare the soil for tree planting in the winter. The fire, which was finally brought under control late on Thursday, led to the evacuation of 1,700 people from the surrounding area. The company said it had alerted the emergency services as soon as the blaze started, and “profoundly regretted” the damage and inconvenience caused. “We are devastated by the latest estimate that the damage will be around 14,000 hectares,” Land Life said. “We sympathise deeply with the feelings of the local community who had to be evacuated from their homes and see their landscape severely damaged.” Land Life said it had offered its help to the authorities and had begun an investigation into what happened. “We will continue to follow up on anything we can do in this situation,” it added. “We want to emphasise that the contractor, a local company with extensive experience in the area, had the appropriate authorisation issued by the local and regional authorities.” According to Spanish media, Land Life was accused of causing another fire in the region last month that burned through 20 hectares of land. “It’s not right that they should carry on working when this has already happened once,” the mayor of Bubierca, one of the evacuated villages, told El Heraldo de Aragón. Land Life says it is committed to helping restore degraded land around the world. According to its website: “Land Life Company was founded on the shared conviction that a business approach and technology can drive innovation to restore nature in our lifetime.”\nTwo people have died in forest fires that have raged across many parts of Spain, while thousands have been evacuated. Spain is estimated to have lost almost 200,000 hectares of land to wildfires so far this year – 80,000 of them during last week’s heatwave and the one that preceded it in June.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T15:46:35Z'}, {'id': '62d9d0508f086f048d09e88d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine and Russia have signed a UN-backed deal to allow the export of millions of tonnes of grain from blockaded Black Sea ports, potentially averting the threat of a catastrophic global food crisis. A signing ceremony at Dolmabahçe Palace in Istanbul was attended by the UN secretary general, António Guterres, and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, who had played a key role during months of tense negotiations. Guterres said “agreement did not come easy”, and described the deal as “a beacon on the Black Sea”. He said “You have overcome obstacles, and put aside differences, to pave the way for an initiative that will serve the common interests of all. Promoting the welfare of humanity has been the driving force of these talks. The question has not been what is good for one side or the other. The focus has been on what matters most for the people of our world. And let there be no doubt – this is an agreement for the world. It will bring relief for developing countries on the edge of bankruptcy, and the most vulnerable people on the edge of famine, and to help stabilise global food prices.” Erdoğan said the grain export deal will prevent billions of people facing famine, and called on Russia and Ukraine to end the war, saying that it doesn’t only affect those involved, but the whole world. He said that the war would have to end at the negotiating table. Robert Mardini, director general of the International Committee of the Red Cross said “A deal that allows grain to leave Black Sea ports is nothing short of life-saving for people across the world who are struggling to feed their families.” Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak said that Ukraine would not sign any documents with Russia as part of the expected grain export deal, but that Ukraine and Russia would instead sign parallel agreements on grain exports with the UN. Podolyak added that any “provocations” by Russia over the deal will be met with a military response. Google is to be banned in the occupied Donetsk region of Ukraine for allegedly promoting “terrorism and violence against all Russians”. Denis Pushilin, head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) said “We have decided to block Google on the territory of the DPR. This is what they do in any society with criminals: they are isolated from other people. If Google stops pursuing its criminal policy and returns to the mainstream of law, morality and common sense, there will be no obstacles for its work.” The Russian ministry of defence has claimed, without providing any evidence, that it killed “up to 300 nationalists” in a strike on a school building in Kramatorsk yesterday. The ministry also said that in the period from 5-20 July it had destroyed four launchers and one transport-loading vehicle of the US-supplied Himars missile system. It also claims to have shot down 12 Ukrainian drones. Ukraine has the potential to inflict major losses on Russia and make gains on the battlefield, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has claimed. Speaking in a late-night video address after meeting with senior military commanders, he said the group discussed the supply of modern weapons, adding the intensity of attacks on the Russians had to be stepped up. The US believes that Russia’s military is sustaining hundreds of casualties a day in its war in Ukraine, and has lost thousands of lieutenants and captains in total, a senior US defence official said on Friday. The UK’s Ministry of Defence has said it believes that Russia is experiencing a “critical shortage” of ground-attack missiles, even as it advances on Kramatorsk and Siversk. The Russian government has expanded its list of “unfriendly states” which now includes 48 countries. The list now includes Greece, Denmark, Slovenia, Croatia and Slovakia. Germany’s economics minister announced a new wave of emergency measures to cut the country’s consumption of gas after flows from Russia through the Nord Stream 1 pipeline resumed at reduced levels following a scheduled shutdown. An EU proposal that member countries cut gas use by 15% to prepare for possible supply cuts from Russia is facing resistance from governments, throwing into doubt whether they will approve the emergency plan. Britain will send scores of artillery guns and more than 1,600 anti-tank weapons to Ukraine, the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said on Thursday. He said Britain would also provide counter-battery radar systems, hundreds of drones and more than 50,000 rounds of ammunition. Ukraine has called for an international tribunal to bring Vladimir Putin to justice more quickly. Trying Russia separately for the act of aggression, with international participation, would speed up its quest to hold the Russian president and his inner circle accountable, officials said. “We hope to have the indictment within three months,” Andriy Smyrnov, Ukraine’s deputy head of the presidential administration, said. The Belarus president, Alexander Lukashenko, said the war must be stopped in order to avoid the “abyss of nuclear war” and insisted Ukraine accept Russia’s demands. “There’s no need to go further. Further lies the abyss of nuclear war,” he told AFP. Lukashenko also accused the west of seeking a conflict with Russia and of provoking the war. “If Russia had not got ahead of you, members of Nato, you would have organised and struck a blow against it,” he said. Russian proxies in the Russian-occupied territory of Donbas have been confiscating documents from forcibly mobilised troops, according to Ukrainian military chiefs. Russian proxies have reportedly been stripping personal documents from residents in attempts to force them to fight against Ukraine and making it impossible for forcibly mobilised troops to desert or identify those who have been killed, the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-22T15:15:50Z'}]}